
--- PAGE 1 ---
1



--- PAGE 2 ---
वित्तीय समािेशन हेतु राष्टतीय काय्यनतीवत 2025-30
2


--- PAGE 3 ---
3
National Strategy for Financial Inclusion 
2025-30


--- PAGE 4 ---
4
National Strategy for Financial Inclusion 2025-30
© Reserve Bank of India 
All rights reserved. Reproduction is permitted provided an acknowledgment of the source is made. 
The publication can also be accessed through Internet at https://www.rbi.org.in 
Published by Financial Inclusion and Development Department (FIDD), Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai 400 001.
Printed at Onlooker Press. 93219 27244


--- PAGE 5 ---
5



--- PAGE 6 ---
6
National Strategy for Financial Inclusion 2025-30



--- PAGE 7 ---
7
CONTENTS
List of Abbreviations…………… ……………………………………………….………......8
Key Terms and Definitions…………………………………………………….……………11
Executive Summary…………..……………………………………………….…………... 15
Chapters
Chapter-I: NSFI: 2019-24 - A Retrospect………………………………….………..........17
Chapter-II: State of Financial Inclusion in India…………………………………............20
Chapter-III: NSFI: 2025-30: Vision……………………………………………...…..........29
Chapter-IV: NSFI: 2025-30: Strategic Goals and Action Points…….…………….…...35
Chapter-V: Monitoring and Measurement Mechanism……………….………….……..52
Annex I: NSFI: 2019-24 Milestones and Achievements ………………....…...…….....58
Annex II: NSFI 2025-30 - Action Points, Stakeholders, and Timeline….……….........68
References.................................................................................................................71


--- PAGE 8 ---
8
National Strategy for Financial Inclusion 2025-30
List of Abbreviations
AePS
Aadhaar Enabled Payment System
AFA
Additional Factor Authentication
ASBA
Application Supported by Blocked 
Amount
AI
Artificial Intelligence
AMFI
Association of Mutual Funds in 
India
APY
Atal Pension Yojana
ATM
Automated Teller Machine
BSBDA
Basic Savings Bank Deposit 
Account
BSDA
Basic Services Demat Account
BPL
Below Poverty Line
BC
Business Correspondent
CBDC
Central Bank Digital Currency
CGMS
Central Grievance Management 
System
CFL
Centre for Financial Literacy
CFCFRMS
Citizen Financial Cyber Frauds 
Reporting and Management 
System
CRE
Community Resource Entities
CA
Corporate Agent
CISCE
Council for the Indian School 
Certificate Examination
CIC
Credit Information Companies
CDD
Customer Due Diligence
DBU
Digital Banking Unit
DPI - RBI
Digital Payments Index – Reserve 
Bank of India
DPI
Digital Public Infrastructures
DSS
Digital Signage System
DBT
Direct Benefit Transfer
E-LMS
E-Learning Management System
ETF
Exchange Traded Fund
EDDPE
Expanding and Deepening of 
Digital Payments Ecosystem
FPO
Farmer Producer Organization
FACT
Financial Awareness and 
Consumer Training
FETP
Financial Education Training 
Programme
FI
Financial Inclusion
FIF
Financial Inclusion Fund
FI-Index
Financial Inclusion Index
FLC
Financial Literacy Center
FSP
Financial Service Provider
FSDC-SC
Financial Stability and 
Development Council – Sub 
Committee
FBC
Fixed-Point Business 
Correspondent
GCC
General Credit Card
GIS
Geographic Information System 
GPFI
Global Partnership for Financial 
Inclusion
ID
Identity Document
IMPS
Immediate Payment Service
IBA
Indian Banks’ Association
ITI
Industrial Training Institute
ICT
Information and Communications 
Technology
IPO
Initial Public Offering
IRDAI
Insurance Regulatory and 
Development Authority of India


--- PAGE 9 ---
9
IGMS
Integrated Grievance Management 
System
IO
Internal Ombudsman
INFE
International Network on Financial 
Education
IoRS
Inter-operable Regulatory Sandbox 
JSS
Jan Shikshan Sansthan
JDD
Jan-Dhan Darshak 
JLG
Joint Liability Group
KCC
Kisan Credit Card
KYC
Know Your Customer
LWE
Left Wing Extremism
LEDP
Livelihood and Enterprise 
Development Programme
MEDP
Micro Enterprise Development 
Programme
MNREGA
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act
MF-AUM
Mutual Fund Assets under 
Management
MSME
Micro Small and Medium 
Enterprises
MSSP
Money Smart School Programme
NABARD
National Bank for Agriculture and 
Rural Development 
NCFE
National Centre for Financial 
Education
NCRP
National Cybercrime Reporting 
Portal
NEFT
National Electronic Funds Transfer
NFIR
National Financial Information 
Registry
NFLAT
National Financial Literacy 
Assessment Test
NGO
Non-Government Organisation
NIC
National Informatics Centre 
NIESBUD
National Institute for 
Entrepreneurship and Small 
Business Development 
NISM
National Institute of Securities 
Markets
NITI Aayog
National Institution for Transforming 
India Aayog
NPCI
National Payments Corporation of 
India
NPS
National Pension System 
NRLM
National Rural Livelihood Mission
NSDC
National Skill Development Council
NSQF
National Skills Qualifications 
Framework
NSFE
National Strategy for Financial 
Education
NSFI
National Strategy for Financial 
Inclusion
NULM
National Urban Livelihood Mission
NBFC
Non-Banking Financial Companies
NGO
Non-Governmental Organisations
NE
North-eastern
OD
Overdraft
OECD
Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development
OTP
One Time Password
PIDF
Payment Infrastructure 
Development Fund
PIN
Personal Identification Number
PSO
Payment System Operators 
PFRDA
Pension Fund Regulatory and 
Development Authority of India
P2M
Person to Merchant
P2P
Person to Person
List of Abbreviations


--- PAGE 10 ---
10
National Strategy for Financial Inclusion 2025-30
ULI
Unified Lending Interface
UPI
Unified Payments Interface
UT
Union Territory
UTLBC
Union Territory Level Bankers’ 
Committee
POP
Points of Presence
POS
Points of Sale
PLP
Potential Linked Plan
PMFBY
Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana
PMJDY
Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana
PMKVY
Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikash 
Yojana
PMSBY
Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima 
Yojana
PML
Prevention of Money Laundering
PCR
Public Credit Registry
RTGS
Real Time Gross Settlement
RO
Regional Office 
RE
Regulated Entities
RS
Regulatory Sandbox
RBIH
Reserve Bank Innovation Hub
RBI
Reserve Bank of India
RSETI
Rural Self Employment Training 
Institute
SCORES
SEBI Complaint Redress System
SEBI
Securities and Exchange Board of India 
SMART
Securities Market Trainer
SHG
Self Help Group
SRO
Self-Regulatory Organisation
SCORM
Shareable Content Object 
Reference Model
SMS
Short Messaging Service
SF/MF
Small and Marginal Farmer
SIDBI
Small Industries Development Bank 
of India
SRO-FT
Self-Regulatory Organisation - 
Fintech Sector
SOP
Standard Operating Procedure
SLBC
State Level Bankers’ Committee
STP
Straight through Processing
SDG
Sustainable Development Goal
SIP
Systematic Investment Plan
TGFIFL
Technical Group on Financial 
Inclusion and Financial Literacy
UAP
Udyam Assist Platform
UIDAI
Unique Identification Authority of 
India
UN
United Nations
USSD
Unstructured Supplementary 
Service Data
V-CIP
Video based Customer 
Identification Procedure
2FA
Two Factor Authentication
List of Abbreviations


--- PAGE 11 ---
11
Key Terms and Definitions
Aadhaar Seeded Account A bank account linked with the account holder’s unique 12-digit AADHAAR 
number.  
Aadhaar Enabled Payments 
System [AePS]
AePS is a bank led model which allows online interoperable financial inclusion 
transaction at PoS (Micro-ATM) through the Business Correspondents of any 
bank using the Aadhaar authentication. 
Application Supported by Blocked 
Amount [ASBA]
ASBA is an application by an investor containing an authorization to Self-
Certified Syndicate Bank (SCSB) to block the application money in the bank 
account, for subscribing to an issue. 
Asset Under Management Asset Under Management [AUM] refers to the total value of assets that a financial 
institution or an investment professional manages on behalf of its investors. 
Atal Pension Yojana [APY] APY is a voluntary, periodic contribution-based pension system, under which the 
subscriber would receive certain pension benefits from the central government. 
Banking Outlets A ‘Banking Outlet’ for a Domestic Scheduled Commercial Bank (DSCB), a 
Small Finance Bank (SFB) and a Payment Bank (PB) is a fixed-point service 
delivery unit, manned by either bank’s staff or its Business Correspondent where 
services of acceptance of deposits, encashment of cheques/ cash withdrawal or 
lending of money are provided for a minimum of 4 hours per day for at least five 
days a week. 
Basic Savings Bank Deposit 
Account [BSBDA]
The Basic Savings Bank Deposit (BSBD) Account is a type of savings account 
with provision of basic minimum facilities free of charge, without any requirement 
of minimum balance. 
Bounded rationality Bounded rationality is a term introduced by Herbert A. Simon (1957), which 
proposes an element of behavioural bias in decisions made due to limitations of 
perfect rationality in real life situations.
Bundled Products Bundled products refer to financial products, which are packaged/distributed 
together, but are also available separately.
Business Correspondents [BCs] Business Correspondents are retail agents engaged by banks for providing 
banking services at locations other than a bank branch/ATM. 
Centers for Financial Literacy 
[CFL]
CFLs are set up at block level in collaboration of NGOs and sponsor banks 
towards disseminating financial awareness messages and augmenting financial 
literacy levels. 
Centralised KYC [CKYC] Registry Central KYC Registry is a centralized repository of KYC records of customers 
in the financial sector with uniform KYC norms and inter-usability of the KYC 
records across the sector with an objective to reduce the burden of producing 
KYC documents and getting those verified every time when the customer creates 
a new relationship with a financial entity. 
Citizen Financial Cyber Frauds 
Reporting and Management 
System (CFCFRMS)
Citizen Financial Cyber Frauds Reporting and Management System has been 
developed for quick reporting of financial cyber frauds and monetary losses 
suffered due to use of digital banking/credit/debit cards, payment intermediaries, 
UPI etc. Complaints can be reported through helpline number 1930 or on 
National Cybercrime Reporting Portal. 
Dark Patterns Dark patterns have been defined as any practices or deceptive design patterns 
using UI/UX (user interface/user experience) interactions on any platform; 
designed to mislead or trick users to do something they originally did not intend or 
want to do; by subverting or impairing the consumer autonomy, decision making 
or choice; amounting to misleading advertisement or unfair trade practice or 
violation of consumer rights.
De-duplication De-duplication is a streamlining process in which redundant data is reduced by 
eliminating extra copies of the same information
Digital KYC Digital KYC means capturing live photo of the customer and officially valid 
document or the proof of possession of Aadhaar, where offline verification 
cannot be carried out, along with the latitude and longitude of the location where 
such live photo is being taken by an authorised officer of the regulated entity. 
Digital Payments Index The Reserve Bank of India has constructed a composite Digital Payments Index 
(DPI) to capture the extent of digitisation of payments across the country. 


--- PAGE 12 ---
12
National Strategy for Financial Inclusion 2025-30
Key Terms and Definitions
Digital Public Infrastructure [DPI] Digital Public Infrastructure (DPI) is described as an infrastructure-based 
approach that uses technology to achieve societal goals through an ecosystem 
(comprising technology, markets, and governance) built in the public interest 
that leverages competitive private innovation within regulatory guardrails.
Farmer Producers Organisation 
[FPO]
It is one type of Producer Organisation [PO] where the members are farmers. 
PO is a generic name for an organization of producers of any produce, e.g., 
agricultural, non-farm products, artisan products, etc. 
Financial Inclusion Index [FI-
Index]
The Reserve Bank of India has constructed a composite Financial Inclusion 
Index (FI-Index) to capture the extent of financial inclusion across the country. 
The FI-Index has been conceptualised as a comprehensive index incorporating 
details of banking, investments, insurance, postal as well as the pension sector 
in consultation with Government and respective sectoral regulators. 
Financial Awareness and 
Knowledge
Financial awareness refers to a broad conceptual understanding, however, 
financial knowledge is context and process specific and a hands-on ability that 
can be put to use.
Financial Literacy Centers [FLCs] FLCs are set up by Lead Banks of the districts. FLCs conduct financial literacy 
camps for farmers, micro entrepreneurs, Self Help Groups (SHGs), school 
children and senior citizens.  
Financial Planning Financial planning is a process of taking well-thought and calibrated steps for 
using and managing one’s financial resources to meet life goals. 
Fintech A linguistic blend of two individual terms ‘Finance’ and ‘Technology’, FinTech is 
being used to denote the wide array of technological innovations that have a 
bearing on financial services. 
Fixed Point Business 
Correspondents [FBC] Outlet
A FBC Outlet is a ‘Banking Outlet’ of a bank which is a fixed-point service delivery 
unit, manned by its Business Correspondent [BC] where services of acceptance 
of deposits, encashment of cheques/cash withdrawal or lending of money are 
provided for a minimum of 4 hours per day for at least five days a week.  
Immediate Payment Service 
[IMPS]
IMPS is a real time payment service that is available round the clock. This service 
is offered by National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI) that empowers 
customers to transfer money instantly through banks and RBI authorized 
Prepaid Payment Instrument Issuers (PPI) across India. 
Inactive BCs A BC agent is classified as inactive if he/she has either not done any transaction 
[financial/non-financial] or logged-in for a period of 3 months [90 days]. 
India Stack India Stack is the collective name of a set of commonly used DPIs in India; 
it consists of three different layers—unique identity (Aadhaar), complimentary 
payments systems (Unified Payments Interface, Aadhaar Payments Bridge, 
Aadhaar Enabled Payment Service), and data exchange (Digilocker and 
Account Aggregator)
Indian Bank’s Association [IBA] IBA is an association of banks and other entities in the banking ecosystem in 
India. 
Inoperative Accounts A saving/ current account shall be treated as inoperative if there are no ‘customer 
induced transactions’ in the account for a period of over two years. 
Interoperable Interoperability is the technical compatibility that enables a payment system to 
be used in conjunction with other payment systems. 
Jan Shikshan Sansthan [JSS] The Scheme of Jan Shikshan Sansthan (JSS) is a Government of India scheme 
[Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship] aimed towards providing 
vocational skills in non-formal mode to non-literate, neo-literates, persons with 
rudimentary level of education up to 8th and school dropouts up to 12th standard 
in the age group of 15-45 years.
Jan Suraksha Schemes Jan Suraksha Schemes are social security schemes [insurance and pension] 
of Government of India and includes the initiatives of Pradhan Mantri Jeevan 
Jyoti Bima Yojana [PMJJBY], Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana [PMSBY] 
[Insurance Schemes] and Atal Pension Yojana [Pension Scheme].
Micro Enterprises An enterprise is classified as a micro enterprise, where the investment in plant 
and machinery or equipment does not exceed ₹2.5 crore and turnover does not 
exceed ₹10 crore. 


--- PAGE 13 ---
13
Key Terms and Definitions
Microfinance All collateral-free loans to individual/s belonging to low-income households, i.e., 
households having annual income up to ₹3 lakh are treated as microfinance 
loans. 
National Bank for Agriculture and 
Rural Development [NABARD]
NABARD is India’s apex development bank, established in 1982 under an 
Act of Parliament to promote sustainable and equitable agriculture and rural 
development. 
National Centre for Financial 
Education [NCFE]
National Centre for Financial Education (NCFE) is a Section 8 (Not for Profit) 
Company promoted by Reserve Bank of India (RBI), Securities and Exchange 
Board of India (SEBI), Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India 
(IRDAI) and Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority (PFRDA). 
National Cybercrime Reporting 
Portal (NCRP)
Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India is implementing a scheme called 
‘Indian Cyber Crime Coordination Centre (I4C)’ to deal with cybercrimes in a 
coordinated and comprehensive manner. NCRP is one of the components of 
I4C which facilitates filing of all types of cybercrimes
National Pension System [NPS] National Pension System is a defined contributory pension system notified by 
Government of India. 
National Skills Qualifications 
Framework [NSQF]
The NSQF organises qualifications according to a series of levels of knowledge, 
skills, and aptitude. These levels are defined in terms of learning outcomes which 
the learner must possess regardless of whether they were acquired through 
formal, non-formal or informal learning. 
National Electronic Fund Transfer 
[NEFT]
National Electronic Funds Transfer (NEFT) is a nation-wide centralised payment 
system owned and operated by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI). 
New to Credit New to credit account means persons/entities who in past did not have any 
credit facility from the bank and has received a credit facility from the bank for 
the very first time.
National Institute for 
Entrepreneurship and Small 
Business Development 
[NIESBUD]
The National Institute for Entrepreneurship and Small Business Development 
is an organization of the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship, 
engaged in training, consultancy, research, etc. in order to promote 
entrepreneurship and Skill Development. 
Non dedicated BC outlets Outlets/Points which are not exclusively only for BC services but have BC 
related services as an addon to the primary business such as Mobile Recharge, 
Kirana Shops etc.
NPS Lite Swavalamban Scheme The Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority (PFRDA) has 
introduced the National Pension System-Lite (NPS-Lite), a low charge model 
based on group servicing for economically disadvantaged. 
National Rural Livelihood Mission 
[NRLM]
NRLM is a flagship poverty alleviation programme implemented by the Ministry 
of Rural Development, Government of India. 
National Skill Development 
Corporation [NSDC]
National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) is a not-for-profit public limited 
company under section 25 of the Companies Act, 1956 (now corresponding 
to section 8 of the Companies Act, 2013), which operates as a Public 
Private Partnership (PPP) model under the Ministry of Skill Development & 
Entrepreneurship (MSDE) towards enhancing, supporting, and coordinating 
various skilling initiatives. 
Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas 
Yojana [PMKVY]
Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY) was launched in 2015 to 
encourage and promote skill development in the country by providing free short 
duration skill training and incentivizing this by providing monetary rewards to 
youth for skill certification. 
Potential Linked Plan [PLP] The PLP provides a detailed scientific assessment of credit potential for various 
sectors in the district. It highlights the sector specific infrastructure gaps and 
critical interventions to be made by State Governments and FIs for harnessing 
potential available under priority sector.
Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Bima 
Yojana [PMJJBY]
PMJJBY is an insurance scheme, launched by Government of India, offering life 
insurance cover to individuals in the age group of 18 to 50 years. It is part of the 
Jan Suraksha Scheme of the Government along with PMSBY and APY. 
Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima 
Yojana [PMSBY]
PMSBY is an accident insurance scheme, launched by Government of India, 
offering accidental death and disability cover to individuals in the age group of 
18 to 70 years. It is part of the Jan Suraksha Scheme of the Government along 
with PMJJBY and APY. 


--- PAGE 14 ---
14
National Strategy for Financial Inclusion 2025-30
Key Terms and Definitions
Registrar and Transfer Agents 
[RTA]
Registrar or transfer agents are the trusts or institutions that register and 
maintain detailed records of the transactions of investors for the convenience of 
mutual fund houses. 
Regulatory Sandbox The Regulatory sandbox provides an opportunity for the eligible entities to 
live test their innovative products or services in a controlled environment. This 
is a collaboration between the regulator, the innovators, the financial service 
providers, and the end users.
Rural Self Employment and 
Training Institute [R-SETIs]
Rural Self Employment Training Institutes are managed by Banks with active 
co-operation from the Government of India and State Government to ensure 
necessary skill training and skill up gradation of the rural youth to mitigate the 
unemployment problem. 
Self-Regulatory Organizations 
[SROs]
Self-Regulatory Organizations (SROs) enhance the effectiveness of regulations 
by drawing upon the technical expertise of practitioners and aid in framing/ fine-
tuning regulatory policies acting as feedback mechanism for regulators. 
Small Industries Development 
Bank of India [SIDBI]
Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) set up on 2nd April 1990 
under an Act of Indian Parliament, acts as the Principal Financial Institution 
for promotion, financing and development of the Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprise (MSME) sector as well as for co-ordination of functions of institutions 
engaged in similar activities. 
Skill Digital India Hub Skill India Digital Hub is designed to skill, reskill, and upskill Indian individuals 
through online platform and acts as a bridge between the employees and 
employers and allow educational institutes to create/modify curricula as per 
industry demands. 
Skill India Mission Skill India Mission is a flagship initiative of the Government of India. Under Skill 
India Mission, Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) is 
implementing various skill development programmes / schemes through training 
centers across the country. 
State Level Bankers Committee 
[SLBC]
The State Level Bankers’ Committee was constituted in April 1977, as an 
apex inter-institutional forum [consisting of banks, Government departments, 
Development Finance Institutions etc.] to create adequate coordination 
machinery in all States, on a uniform basis for development of the State. 
Sustainable Development Goals 
[SDG]
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), a set of 17 global goals, were 
adopted by the United Nations in 2015 as a universal call to action to end 
poverty, protect the planet, and ensure that by 2030 all people enjoy peace and 
prosperity. 
Sustainable Indebtedness A rule of thumb measure for sustainable indebtedness is ensuring that monthly 
repayment amount towards outstanding loans should not be more than half of 
the monthly income of the household. 
Tier V & VI Centers Tier Wise classification of centers as per population [Census 2011]. 
Tier V – Centers with population between 5,000 to 9,999. 
Tier VI – Centers with population less than 5000.
Udyam Assist Platform The Udyam Assist Platform of Ministry of MSME, Govt. of India facilitates online 
registration of Informal Micro Enterprises through Assist Process for generation 
of Udyam Registration Number and Udyam Assist Certificate.
Unified Payment Interface [UPI] 
Lite
UPI LITE is a payment solution which runs off the existing UPI ecosystem 
protocols for enabling low value transactions without utilizing a Remitter bank’s 
core banking systems in real-time. It operates currently with a per transaction 
limit of ₹ 1000, cumulative usage per day at ₹ 10000, and maximum balance at 
a time of ₹5000.
Unified Payment Interface [UPI] 
Lite X
UPI LITE X is same as UPI LITE except that it allows offline payments without 
internet connectivity, enhancing the existing UPI LITE functionalities. It operates 
currently with a per transaction limit of ₹ 500, cumulative usage per day at ₹ 
4000, and maximum balance at a time of ₹ 2000.
Unstructured Supplementary 
Service Data [USSD]
USSD (Unstructured Supplementary Service Data) is a Global System for 
Mobile Communications (GSM) protocol that is used to send text messages. In 
India, *99# is a USSD-based mobile banking service of NPCI. 
Union Territory Level Bankers’ 
Committee [UTLBC]
Similar to SLBC, a forum at Union Territory Level [ India has 28 States and 8 
Union Territories] 


--- PAGE 15 ---
15
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The National Strategy for Financial Inclusion 
(NSFI) 2019-2024 had set forth the vision and 
key objectives of the financial inclusion policies 
in India to help expand and sustain the financial 
inclusion process at the national level through 
a broad convergence of action involving all the 
stakeholders in the financial sector. It aimed 
at broadening, deepening, and accelerating 
financial inclusion alongside promoting 
financial literacy and consumer protection, 
with a view to promoting economic wellbeing, 
prosperity, and sustainable development. The 
five-year period of NSFI: 2019-24 witnessed 
significant improvements across the access, 
usage, and quality dimensions of financial 
inclusion.
2. Continuing the journey and leveraging the 
gains in the bank account ownership to near 
saturation, expansion in physical and digital 
access infrastructure, and improvements 
in customer awareness and protection 
measures, NSFI: 2025-30 envisions 
upscaling the financial inclusion efforts 
towards seamless and effective access to a 
bouquet of formal financial services, coupled 
with financial literacy, consumer awareness 
and customer protection. It emphasises 
adoption of a synergistic ecosystem approach 
and focusing on improving the quality and 
consistency of last mile access, and effective 
usage of financial services through linkages 
with skilling and livelihood initiatives. 
3. NSFI: 2025-30 document comprises of five 
chapters. Chapter-I provides a retrospect of 
NSFI: 2019-24. It highlights the strategic pillars 
and milestones under NSFI:2019-24 and 
offers detailed assessment of the progress in 
the achievement of its milestones. 
4. Chapter-II analyses the state of financial 
inclusion in India by presenting the trends 
relating to key parameters of financial inclusion, 
namely, banking infrastructure, number 
of bank accounts/cards per capita, bank 
deposits, credit, and mutual-fund - asset under 
management, insurance/pension subscribers 
and supporting infrastructure, volume 
and value of digital transactions, financial 
literacy programmes, and financial inclusion 
index. The analysis shows good progress 
in various financial inclusion parameters. 
This chapter also discusses certain supply 
and demand side impediments to financial 
inclusion based on empirical studies, so that 
the recommendations of NSFI: 2025-30, are 
aligned to addressing such impediments 
through suitable policy solutions.
5. Chapter-III of the NSFI document 
underscores that the mandate of financial 
inclusion goes beyond access to financial 
services to ensure effective usage of financial 
services towards wellbeing of people that 
can lead to desirable outcomes in terms of 
financial safety, financial security, financial 
resilience, and financial discipline. The vision 
of NSFI: 2025-30 is to strengthen the financial 
inclusion ecosystem with the synergised 
efforts of stakeholders for ensuring delivery 
of equitable, responsible, suitable, and 
affordable financial services duly supported 
by livelihood enablers, financial literacy, digital 


--- PAGE 16 ---
16
National Strategy for Financial Inclusion 2025-30
public infrastructure, and customer protection. 
The timeline of NSFI: 2025-30 is synchronized 
with the 2030 UN Agenda for Sustainable 
Development. The principle of universality: 
‘Leave No One Behind’ and omni-dimensional 
development as the global agenda for 2030, 
aligns well with the NSFI’s strategic objectives 
intended towards ensuring wellbeing of people, 
especially the vulnerable and marginalised.
6. Chapter-IV of the NSFI: 2025-30 puts 
forward the following five strategic objectives 
(Panch-Jyoti) towards elevating the state of 
financial inclusion in the country. 
I. Improving the availability and use of 
Equitable, Responsible, Suitable, and 
Affordable Bouquet of Financial Services 
to achieve Financial Safety and Financial 
Security for households and micro enterprises.
II. Adopting Gender-Sensitive Approach 
for Women-led Financial Inclusion and 
Differentiated Strategies for Improving 
Financial Resilience of Households, especially 
for the Underserved and Vulnerable segments.
III. Synergizing Livelihood, Skill Development 
and Support Ecosystem and its linkages with 
Financial Inclusion.
IV. Leveraging Financial Education as a tool 
for Promoting Financial Discipline.
V. Strengthening the Quality and Reliability of 
Customer Protection and Grievance Redressal 
Measures.
7. The strategic objectives under Panch-
Jyoti have structured recommendations to 
be implemented through 47 action points, 
including three measurement related action 
points indicated in Chapter-V on Monitoring 
and Measurement Mechanism. The focus of 
the recommendations is on enhancing the 
usage and quality dimensions of financial 
inclusion, while improving the last mile access 
and ensuring effectiveness and granularity in 
the monitoring and measurement mechanism. 
The action-points and timelines under NSFI: 
2025-30 are distributed across financial 
sector regulators (Reserve Bank of India 
– RBI, Securities and Exchange Board of 
India – SEBI, Insurance Regulatory and 
Development Authority of India – IRDAI, and, 
Pension Fund Regulatory and Development 
Authority – PFDRA), and financial services 
providers under their respective jurisdictions, 
along with National Bank for Agriculture and 
Rural Development – NABARD, National 
Skill Development Corporation – NSDC, and 
National Centre for Financial Education – 
NCFE. 
8. To sum up, NSFI: 2025-30 leverages the 
gains and progress made during the period 
of the previous strategy and strives to put in 
place a strategic vision and pathway to further 
deepening and strengthening the financial 
inclusion ecosystem towards the wellbeing of 
people.


--- PAGE 17 ---
17
CHAPTER - I 
NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR FINANCIAL INCLUSION 
(NSFI) 2019-24: A RETROSPECT
The National Strategy for Financial Inclusion 
(NSFI) 2019-2024 set forth the vision and key 
objectives of the financial inclusion policies in 
India to help expand and sustain the financial 
inclusion process at the national level through 
a broad convergence of action involving all 
the stakeholders in the financial sector. The 
strategy provided a pathway to accelerate 
financial inclusion to promote economic 
wellbeing, prosperity, and sustainable 
development in the country.
2. The strategy was prepared based on 
the consultations and suggestions from 
Government of India, other Financial 
Sector Regulators namely, Securities and 
Exchange Board of India (SEBI), Insurance 
Regulatory and Development Authority of 
India (IRDAI), and Pension Fund Regulatory 
and Development Authority of India (PFRDA) 
as also the specialised institutions and 
market participants, namely, National Bank 
for Agriculture and Rural Development 
(NABARD), National Payments Corporation 
of India (NPCI), Commercial Banks, etc.
3. Anchored to the country’s development 
priorities, the strategy sought to address the 
inherent barriers in access to formal financial 
products and services. It recognised that an 
inclusive financial system, ably supported 
through sound financial inclusion policies with 
focus on financial education and customer 
protection, is not only pro-growth but also pro-
poor. Further, it has the potential to reduce 
income inequality and poverty, promote social 
cohesion and shared economic development. 
NSFI underscored that financial exclusion 
leaves the disadvantaged and low- income 
segments of society with no choice other than 
informal options, making them vulnerable 
to financial distress, debt, and poverty, and 
ultimately leading to several multi-dimensional 
physical, socio-cultural, and psychological 
barriers and deprivations. Hence, it warranted 
attention from the policy makers for effective 
action.  
4. NSFI concurred with the widely available 
empirical evidence on how financial inclusion 
has a multiplier effect in boosting overall 
economic output and reducing poverty and 
income inequality at the national level. It 
emphasised that financial inclusion of women 
is particularly important for gender equality 
and women’s economic empowerment. With 
greater control over their financial lives, 
women can help themselves and their families 
to come out of poverty, reduce their risk of 
falling into poverty; eliminate their exploitation 
from the informal sector; and increase their 
ability to fully engage in measurable and 
productive economic activities. An inclusive 
financial system supports stability, integrity, 
and equitable growth, which the NSFI intended 
to achieve through a set of six strategic pillars 
(Figure I.1) and 18 milestones.


--- PAGE 18 ---
18
National Strategy for Financial Inclusion 2025-30
Figure I.1: NSFI (2019-24) Strategic Pillars
Assessment of Progress in Achievement 
of NSFI Milestones
5. Released in January 2020, the strategy 
aimed to provide access to formal financial 
services in an affordable manner, besides 
broadening and deepening financial inclusion 
and promoting financial literacy and consumer 
protection. Over the course of strategy, the 
NSFI has catalysed the deepening of financial 
inclusion in the country. With emphasis 
on the last mile delivery of formal financial 
services, some form of banking access has 
been provided within a radius of 5 KM of 
99.9 percent of the identified villages/hamlets 
of 500 households and a slew of measures 
were undertaken towards strengthening the 
Business Correspondent (BC) channel for last 
mile access. 
6. There has been marked improvement in the 
availability of acceptance infrastructure leading 
to accelerated adoption of digital financial 
services by way of setting up of Payment 
Infrastructure development Fund (PIDF), 
Bharat Net Project, provision of e-KYC across 
financial sector regulators and scaling up of 
Expanding and Deepening of Digital Payments 
Ecosystem (EDDPE) project. The five-year 
period has also witnessed efforts towards 
bolstering responsible financial innovation with 
several cohorts launched under Regulatory 
Sandbox and by mainstreaming of novel 
financial solutions for reaching the last mile. 
There were several landmark achievements 
on the demand side of financial inclusion 
with coverage of all the blocks in the country 
through Centres for Financial Literacy (CFL), 
development of tailored financial literacy 
modules for key segments by National Centre 
for Financial Education (NCFE), setting up/
strengthening of web portals for grievance 
redressal and institutionalisation of toll-free 
helpline numbers by all the financial sector 
regulators. 
7. During the five-year period of the strategy, 
the extent of financial inclusion has improved 
significantly. The total number of banking 
outlets in villages has increased from 5.97 lakh 
in March 2019 to 15.98 lakh in March 2024 1. 
Similarly, total number of basic savings bank 
deposit accounts has increased from 57.42 
crore in March 2019 to 70.59 crore in March 
20242. The enrolment in case of insurance 
and pension schemes has also shown 
improvement during the strategy period, with 
enrolment in Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti 
Bima Yojana (PMJJBY) improving from 5.34 
crore in March 2019 to 16 crores in March 
20243, with a CAGR of 25 percent. Similarly, 
enrolment in Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima 
Yojana (PMSBY) improved from 13.52 crore to 
33.78 crore during the period4, with a CAGR of 
20 percent. Cumulative number of subscribers 
1 Financial Inclusion Plan [FIP] Monthly Return
2 ibid
3 https://dfs.dashboard.nic.in/
4 ibid


--- PAGE 19 ---
19
CHAPTER - I
to Atal Pension Yojana (APY) grew at a CAGR 
of 42 percent from 97 lakh to 555 lakhs during 
the period of strategy.  
8. Furthermore, during the period of strategy, 
the Reserve Bank launched two specific 
indices viz. Digital Payments Index (DPI) 
and Financial Inclusion Index (FI-Index) in 
2021, to capture the extent of digitalisation 
of payments and assess the level of financial 
inclusion across the country, respectively. The 
DPI, which stood at 153.47 in March 2019, 
has risen to 445.50 in March 2024. The FI-
Index has improved from 49.9 in 2019 to 64.2 
in 2024, with Access sub-index improving from 
67.5 in 2019 to 79.3 in 2024, usage sub-index 
improving from 38.7 in 2019 to 55.5 in 2024 
and quality sub-index improving from 52.6 in 
2019 to 65.8 in 2024. 
9. A brief summary of the progress made with 
regard to each of the NSFI strategic objectives/ 
milestones is presented in the Annex-I. 


--- PAGE 20 ---
20
National Strategy for Financial Inclusion 2025-30
CHAPTER-II 
STATE OF FINANCIAL INCLUSION IN INDIA
Financial Inclusion: Progress and Key 
Trends – 2019-24
The five-year period of NSFI: 2019-24 
witnessed significant improvements across 
the access, usage, and quality dimensions of 
financial inclusion. While moving forward to 
the NSFI: 2025-30, it is important to take stock 
of the progress achieved during the period of 
NSFI: 2019-24 and look forward to the journey 
ahead. 
2. The following paragraphs present the 
progress and trends 5 relating to key aspects 
of financial inclusion, namely, banking 
infrastructure, number of bank accounts/
cards per capita, bank deposits, credit, and 
mutual-fund–asset under management, 
insurance/pension subscribers and supporting 
infrastructure, volume and value of digital 
transactions, financial literacy programmes 
and participants, and the financial inclusion 
index.
Banking Infrastructure
3. The banking infrastructure in terms of the 
number of bank branches, Automated Teller 
Machines (ATMs), NBFC branches, and fixed-
point business correspondents is shown in 
Chart II.1.  The chart shows moderate but 
consistent expansion in branches and ATMs, 
along with rapid rise in the number of fixed-
point business correspondents (FBCs). FBCs 
have provided a significant support to the last 
mile reach of banking infrastructure. 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Mar-19 Mar-20 Mar-21 Mar-22 Mar-23 Mar-24
FBCs - Number 
Bank Br, ATMs, NBFC Br. Number Chart II.1: Banking Infrastructure (Numbers in Lakhs)
Bank Branches ATMs NBFC  Branches Business Correspondents (FBCs)
4. In terms of banking infrastructure per lakh 
population, the progress shows 85.6 FBCs 
per lakh population, up from 30.1 FBCs per 
lakh population in 2019. The position of bank 
branches and ATMs has been consistent with 
the average number of branches per lakh 
population hovering around 12.5 and average 
number of ATMs per lakh population around 
17 to 18 (Chart II.2).
0.0
10.0
20.0
30.0
40.0
50.0
60.0
70.0
80.0
90.0
0.0
2.0
4.0
6.0
8.0
10.0
12.0
14.0
16.0
18.0
20.0
Mar-19 Mar-20 Mar-21 Mar-22 Mar-23 Mar-24
FBCs Number/ Population (per Lakhs)
Number/ Population (per Lakhs)
Chart II.2: Banking Infrastructure per Lakh Population 
Bank Branches ATMs NBFC  Branches Business Correspondents (FBCs)
Usage of Banking Infrastructure
5. Chart II.3 throws light on usage of banking 
infrastructure in terms of per capita number of 
bank accounts and cards, followed by trend of 
mutual fund assets under management (MF-
AUM), bank deposits, and credit over the last 
five years in Chart II.4.
5 Based on the data collected from banks and other stakeholders (2019-2024) and projected population.


--- PAGE 21 ---
21
6. Both the charts (II.3, II.4) show consistent growth 
in the parameters indicating gradual expansion 
of footprints of the financial system, with none of 
the parameters showing any negative trend. MF-
AUM has also shown consistent growth along 
with rise in current deposits. 
7. Another important dimension of usage is 
reflected in Chart II.5, which shows the trend 
of insurance/pension (NPS) subscribers and 
the corresponding infrastructure (offices 
and agents of insurance companies). All the 
parameters, except office (non-life) indicate 
growth and there is a significant improvement 
in the subscriber base of Atal Pension Yojana. 
Digital Transactions and Usages
8. Riding on the backbone of Digital Public 
Infrastructure, digital transactions both in 
terms of volume and value have contributed 
significantly to the deepening and broad 
basing of the reach of financial inclusion 
initiatives (Charts II.6 and II.7). There has 
been an exponential increase in the volume 
of digital transactions led by Unified Payments 
Interface (UPI). Amongst the retail digital 
payments, there has been substantial growth 
across the board in national electronic funds 
transfer (NEFT), immediate payment service 
(IMPS) and UPI, with UPI touching more than 
13,000 crore transactions in 2023-24. The 
NEFT however, carried much higher value of 
transactions as shown in Chart II.7.
Quality of Financial Inclusion – Financial 
Literacy
9. Financial literacy being one of the key 
enablers of the quality of financial inclusion has 
shown tremendous progress over the period 
2019-24. Chart II.8 shows a consistent rise 
(except during the period of Covid-19) in the 
number of financial literacy programmes run 
by Centers for Financial Literacy (CFLs) and 
Financial Literacy Centers (FLCs), especially 
during the last two years with rapid expansion 
in the opening of CFLs touching more than 3.5 
Crore participants. Besides financial literacy
CHAPTER - II


--- PAGE 22 ---
22
National Strategy for Financial Inclusion 2025-30
6 As per Para IV (8) of Statement on Developmental and Regulatory Policies (under first Bi-monthly Monetary Policy Statement for 2021-22 dated April 7, 2021) 
a Financial Inclusion Index (Fl-Index) was to be constructed and published annually by the Bank, to measure the extent of FI in the country.
programmes run by RBI regional offices, 
National Centre for Financial Education 
(NCFE) and other sectoral regulators have 
also covered significant ground in this regard.
Overall Progress – Financial Inclusion (FI-
Index)
10. Chart II.9 shows trend of FI-Index 6 and 
its sub-indices (Access, Usage, and Quality). 
Their respective contribution to FI-Index is 
shown in Chart II.10. The index shows a 
consistent growth over the period of 5 years 
with improvements seen across all the sub-
indices. In the year 2024, the major growth in 
the index was on account of the usage sub-
index, which shows deepening of financial 
inclusion. The dip in quality sub-index in 2021 
was due to reduced number of financial literacy 
activities due to lockdown led restrictions 
during the COVID-19 pandemic.
11. The above analysis shows substantial 
growth and progress in various financial 
inclusion parameters as discussed above. 
NSFI also played a key role during the 
period of COVID-19 pandemic (Box II.1). 
However, financial inclusion initiatives being 
aspirational in nature should always keep 
striving for improvements and effectiveness 
by mitigating gaps and improving the ground 
level implementation with a holistic approach 
and outcome orientation. Accordingly, it 
is important to gather feedback, examine 
existing and incipient supply and demand 
side impediments to financial inclusion and 
implement suitable policy solutions. The 
recommendations and approach of NSFI: 
2025-30, are aligned to this edifice and 
direction. 
Note - Negative contribution of Quality during 2021 due to reduced FL activities during Covid pandemic


--- PAGE 23 ---
23
COVID-19 pandemic induced an unforeseen 
global socio-economic distress and caused 
loss of lives and livelihood with substantial spill 
overs. This created an extraordinary challenge 
for the governments and policymakers to 
implement appropriate relief, restoration, and 
stimulus package to minimise and absorb the 
pandemic induced hardships.
Government of India, State Governments, 
Reserve Bank of India and other relevant 
stakeholders took numerous steps to leverage 
the last mile reach of the FI ecosystem and 
digital transactions in furthering and deepening 
the financial inclusion efforts, especially 
through Digital Public Infrastructures (DPI) 7 
in a cost-effective and innovative manner. 
To mitigate the adverse impact of COVID-19 
pandemic, the Government of India was 
able to smoothly deliver an amount of ₹5.53 
lakh crore digitally across 319 government 
schemes spread over 54 ministries during 
2020-218 under the PM Garib Kalyan Yojana, 
using DPI. 
The Business Correspondent (BC) Model 
emerged as a critical lifeline in disbursing 
such benefits to the doorstep of the people, 
especially in rural areas of the country. 
During the pandemic, ICT-BC transaction 
routed through BC outlets witnessed a 
significant surge crossing more than 94 crore 
transactions accounting for ₹2.25 lakh crore 
during 2020-219. 
RBI in its pursuit to support digital financial 
services enhanced limit for additional factor 
of authentication (AFA) per transaction for 
card transactions in contactless mode at 
Points of Sale (PoS) terminals, while actively 
promoting use of digital payments. Further, 
to alleviate stress amongst small borrowers, 
RBI undertook measures, namely, grant 
of moratorium on consumer term loan for a 
period of six months (March 1, 2020 – August 
31, 2020), deferment of interest on working 
capital facilities in the form of cash credit/
overdraft, easing of working capital financing, 
and facilitating financial institutions to resolve 
stressed loans to individuals, small business 
and MSMEs, besides several relaxations in 
priority sector lending. 
Since the pandemic created hurdles in 
delivering financial literacy to the masses 
through physical modes, Regional Offices 
(ROs) of the Bank explored innovative 
approaches to promote financial literacy 
amongst the masses, such as Community 
Radio Channels, Local TV Channels and Local 
FM stations to impart the financial education in 
regional languages/local dialects. On its part, 
SEBI adopted virtual mode to reach out to 
investors across the country covering over one 
lakh participants through investor awareness 
programmes conducted by exchanges, 
depositories, and SEBI recognised investor 
associations and trainers.
Box II.1: Role of FI Ecosystem during COVID-19 Pandemic
7 DPI, generally understood as interoperable, open, and inclusive systems supported by technology to provide essential society-wide public and private services, 
can play a critical role in accelerating this digital transformation in an inclusive way. Conceptually, DPIs, in general, include Digital ID, Digital Payments, and Data 
Exchange in the financial sector. – (G20 GPFI World Bank 2023). In case of India, DPI harnessed the state-of-the-art layer of national ID (Aadhaar), fast payment 
system (UPI) and data sharing protocols [Account Aggregators] to advance digital financial inclusion.
8  Excerpts from Governor’s Speech on Financial Inclusion – Past, Present and Future dated July 15, 2021.
9 https://m.rbi.org.in/Scripts/BS_ViewBulletin.aspx?Id=20366 – FY 2020-21.


--- PAGE 24 ---
24
National Strategy for Financial Inclusion 2025-30
Supply and Demand Side Impediments to 
Financial Inclusion
12. Financial inclusion initiatives start from 
the supply side of financial services whereby 
the availability of financial services in terms 
of access points, products, etc. is ensured. 
Availability of adequate supply infrastructure for 
financial services in terms of well-functioning 
access points, physical or digital interfaces, 
suitable products, and services, etc., is 
necessary though not a sufficient condition 
for effective financial inclusion, as demand for 
financial services also plays a crucial role in 
effectiveness of financial inclusion initiatives. 
Hence, both supply and demand aspects of 
financial inclusion should be paid adequate 
attention to, while formulating financial 
inclusion strategies. 
13. Amongst the key supply side challenges, 
the quality and effectiveness of last mile reach 
to the financial services remains the most 
important element. On the other hand, demand 
side issues are conditioned by several factors 
in the usage and quality dimension of financial 
inclusion. 
14. The first set of challenges to the demand 
for financial services stem from information 
asymmetry, lack of proper knowhow about 
availability, cost, and use of financial services, 
and at times, inability to understand and 
comprehend the information due to language 
or literacy barriers. Secondly, behavioural 
factors, such as personality traits, experiential 
factors, bounded rationality, and impulsive 
actions also play a role in catalyzing or 
dampening the usage of financial services. 
Behaviourally, the perceived need for financial 
services, and trust in the system are the two 
most crucial determinants of the demand 
side of financial inclusion. If people trust that 
it is in their benefit to use formal financial 
services, they will seek access and ensure 
usage, provided the services are suitably 
and conveniently made available in an 
affordable manner. Another critical demand-
side impediment to financial inclusion falls 
in the domain of financial constraints, which 
either sway away people from the banking 
system or their usage remains very low. 
The effectiveness of customer protection 
and grievance redressal measures remains 
at the core of the demand for financial 
services, especially for the underprivileged 
and vulnerable segments of the population. 
Moreover, the ecosystem gaps, namely, 
inefficient, or broken linkages between various 
initiatives, and gaps in market access coupled 
with funding constraints could dampen the 
demand side of financial inclusion. 
15. The success in financial inclusion 
initiatives, therefore, requires multi-
stakeholder contribution in all its dimensions, 
namely, access, usage, and quality. To be 
effective, financial inclusion policies besides 
having a focus on strengthening supply 
initiatives in the financial sector in terms of 
easy and trustworthy availability of access 
points, minimum cost of services, suitable 
products, financial literacy and proper flow 
of information, and an effective grievance 
redressal mechanism, should also adequately 
focus on understanding and mitigating demand 
side impediments and improving the enablers 
both in supply and demand dimensions.  
16. The National Strategy for Financial 
Inclusion (NSFI: 2019-24) highlighted the need 


--- PAGE 25 ---
25
CHAPTER - II
for periodic evaluation of the state of financial 
inclusion through monitoring of financial 
inclusion parameters to provide policy makers 
and stakeholders with necessary insights 
to understand the achievements made and 
to address issues and challenges through a 
coordinated approach. NSFI also underlined 
that in addition to data collected from financial 
service providers (supply-side data), there 
is also a need to seek views and insights 
from the customers (demand-side insights) 
at periodic intervals. Accordingly, specific 
studies and surveys were undertaken by the 
Reserve Bank to understand the ground level 
issues and impediments, in both demand and 
supply dimensions. Based on the studies, 
the following is a summary of key supply 
and demand side impediments to financial 
inclusion.
Supply Side Impediments – Last Mile 
Reach by Business Correspondents
17. An assessment of supply side impediments, 
especially from the angle of last mile access 
reveals that the last mile reach of financial 
services being carried out by business 
correspondents (BC) requires improvements. 
An all-India survey was conducted by the 
Bank on the operations of BCs during 
January-March 2024 through its Regional 
Offices across the country. About 63% of BCs 
covered by the survey were in rural areas, 
23% in semi-urban areas, and 14% in urban 
areas. The survey covering 13274 BC outlets 
in 31 States/UTs involving 154 districts with 
a greater weightage to aspirational districts, 
revealed the following areas of concerns, 
which require corrective measures. 
(a) The presence of a significant number of 
non-dedicated outlets in the BC ecosystem 
was a matter of concern, as financial services 
not being their primary business, diluted 
the access and quality of financial services 
available at these outlets, especially in the 
areas where BCs were the only or primary 
modes of access to financial services. 
Representation of women in the BC agents 
also needed an uptick.
(b) Remittances and cash in/out were the most 
commonly provided services by BC outlets. 
Some BCs also provided services relating 
to savings, recurring, and fixed deposits. 
However, other services, such as insurance, 
micro-pension, loans, overdrafts, KCC, GCC, 
etc. were provided only at select BC outlets. 
Hence, there was a possibility of deficiency 
in the uniform availability of services in areas 
entirely dependent on BC outlets.
(c) There was a lack of standardization in the 
services offered by BCs, due to absence of any 
prescribed minimum standard set of services 
to be provided by BCs, with proper signage 
and bank linkage. As a result, it was difficult 
to properly anchor and monitor the customer 
expectations and the service delivery.
(d) The BC ecosystem was marred by a 
significant proportion of inactive 10 and/or 
closed BC outlets. The distribution of BCs 
was skewed in many places, as BCs tends 
to congregate towards market centres or 
bank branches, thereby compromising on the 
need for equitable access to people and also 
causing a lack of easy access in remote areas. 
(e) Insufficient and lack of timely remuneration 
10 BCs are defined as inactive if there are no financial/non-financial transactions or log-in for a period of 90 days. [Ref. IBA letter to their member banks – IBA/
PSBT/L/2024/110 dated 05/12/2024.]


--- PAGE 26 ---
26
National Strategy for Financial Inclusion 2025-30
was observed as a major reason for inactivity, 
service apathy, and certain unscrupulous 
practices amongst BCs. The lack of a fixed 
component of remuneration as a constraint 
was highlighted by several BCs during the 
survey.
(f) Several BC outlets/agents were 
simultaneously working for multiple banks 
thereby leading to accountability vacuum 
from the point of view of customer service. 
Since banks are responsible for the business 
conducted by BCs, this was unhelpful from the 
point of quality of financial services.
(g) The survey showed that a majority of BCs 
did not display fees levied for services. While 
certain charges are built into the transactions 
by banks, there were concern relating to 
upfront unauthorized/unaccounted levying of 
charges by BC agents. 
(h) Lack of a standardised mandatory 
transaction confirmation SMS (in vernacular 
language) or audio-based confirmation 
(through the sound-box mechanism) for all 
transactions impacted the trust in the services 
rendered by BC agents. 
(i) The quality of services rendered by BC 
outlets needed improvement as many BC 
outlets did not display the details of the 
grievance redressal mechanism, base branch, 
banking ombudsman, etc. 
(j) The service quality at the last mile was also 
impacted by connectivity issues, operational 
difficulties, limited inter-operability, and unscrupulous 
practices like transaction splitting, etc.
Demand Side Impediments and Challenges 
18. To assess the demand side impediments 
to financial inclusion at a disaggregated 
level with demographic details, an all-India 
survey was conducted during March-April 
2024. The survey had a total number of 9,147 
respondents spread across 34 States/Union 
Territories11 of the country. With a median 
respondent’s age of 32 years, and median 
income of ₹ 1.60 lakh, the survey offered a 
reasonably representative all-India sample to 
deep dive into financial inclusion ecosystem 
and gain the ground level perspectives on the 
demand-side impediments to the progress of 
financial inclusion. The following is a summary 
of key observations of the survey.
19. Access and Usage of Bank Account – 
(a) With account ownership at nearly universal 
level (96% respondents had a bank account), 
a key demand side impediment to account 
ownership/usage was lack of source of deposit 
to bank account, which indicates regularity and 
sustenance of income as a key demand-side 
impediment to the usage of financial services 
for people hailing from relatively lower income 
groups. 
(b) Besides the income, a preference for 
cash, lack of knowledge, or family members 
having an account emerged as common 
impediments to bank account ownership and 
usage for relatively lower income groups. 
Awareness about deposit insurance was 
lower as compared to zero balance bank 
account facility under BSBDA. Illiteracy or lack 
of formal education and low income emerged 
as impediments to the intended level of 
11 Except Manipur and UT of Lakshadweep.


--- PAGE 27 ---
27
CHAPTER - II
awareness focused on under financial literacy 
initiatives. 
(c) Non-usage of bank accounts due to 
lack of regular source of deposit was more 
dominant for male respondents and was more 
pronounced in other than semi-urban areas. 
In case of semi-urban areas, banking fee/
charges were reported as major impediments. 
People’s trust in banks to save money was 
more pronounced in rural areas. The level of 
education helped in strengthening trust and 
retaining customer relationship in the formal 
financial system. Generally, people with lower 
education were relatively unable or unwilling 
to save through banking channels.
(d) Usage of BC outlets was higher in rural/
semi-urban areas as compared to urban areas, 
especially for female respondents vis-à-vis 
male respondents. The study shows that as one 
moves up the hierarchy in terms of income and 
education levels, the preference for transacting 
through branch or BC mode diminishes and 
preference for digital transactions enhances. 
However, transactions at ATMs seem to be 
not impacted by income or education levels. 
Hence, income and education emerge as 
a couple of key demand side determinants 
of the choice of access points and mode of 
transactions. 
(e) Preference for digital transactions was 
seen conditioned by gender, education, 
and income levels. Male respondents and 
people form higher income groups had higher 
preference for digital transactions. Having 
a smartphone did not necessarily translate 
as a fillip for digital transactions as several 
respondents felt dissuaded from undertaking 
digital transactions due to connectivity issues, 
complex interfaces, language barrier and 
concerns regarding breach of OTP/PIN, etc.
20. Access and Usage of Credit Facilities – 
(a) In the household segment, personal 
loans, education loans, and home loans were 
the top three credit facilities in demand, yet 
about 50 percent of aspirants had unmet 
credit needs. Lack of awareness about the 
procedure, unavailability of nearby bank 
branch, and lack of collateral were cited as top 
three impediments in that order, for inability 
to get credit. Interestingly, high cost (interest 
rate) of credit was the least cited impediment.
(b) Around 16 per cent of the respondents 
used informal sources of credit mostly for 
small ticket loans, with its share being higher 
in rural areas. In general, people may have 
relied upon informal sources of credit due to 
ease, timeliness, and convenient access. 
21. Access and Usage of Insurance and 
Pension Facilities – 
(a) Income and education levels emerged as 
key enablers for better usage of insurance 
and pension facilities (Chart II.11). 
b) While female respondents lagged their male 
counterparts in access to life insurance, they 
had an edge in non-life insurance indicating 
a possibility of gradually increasing asset 
ownership by female.
(c) Among the respondents who did not 
have any insurance/pension product, the 
awareness about the need for insurance 
and pension products was found to be low. 
In general, awareness about schemes like 
PMSBY, PMJJBY, PMFBY, and APY ranged 
between 30-35%. However, the respondents 
who knew some beneficiary of insurance claim 


--- PAGE 28 ---
28
National Strategy for Financial Inclusion 2025-30
were generally more likely to opt for it.
22. Quality of Financial Services: Financial 
Literacy, Customer Service and Grievance 
Redressal – 
(a) Long wait hours for undertaking financial 
transactions at branches and high customer 
burden complaint resolution systems, which 
puts the primary onus on customers, were 
highlighted as key impediments. There were 
hardly any customer complaints at BC points, 
which was not helpful.
(b) While high level of service satisfaction from 
bank services was expressed by respondents, 
it did not match with the relatively lower 
satisfaction with attention and sensitivity shown 
by the bank staff, and comparatively lesser 
awareness about complaint process, etc. This 
could imply that the overall feedback about 
customer satisfaction may not be properly 
anchored to its underlying parameters. 
23. NSFI: 2025-30 leverages the gains and 
progress made during the period of pervious 
strategy and strives to put in place a strategic 
vision and pathway to mitigate demand and 
supply impediments while further deepening 
and strengthening the financial inclusion 
ecosystem.


--- PAGE 29 ---
29
CHAPTER - III 
VISION OF NSFI (2025-30):  
AN INCLUSIVE FINANCIAL SYSTEM TOWARDS 
WELLBEING OF PEOPLE
12 The 17 Goals – Sustainable Development; https://sdgs.un.org/goals
Financial inclusion initiatives generally begin 
with supply initiatives to provide affordable, 
easy, trusted, and fair access to regulated 
financial services, namely, savings, payments, 
investments, credit, remittances, insurance, 
and pension to hitherto excluded and 
marginalized segments of society. Though 
financial inclusion falls within the ambit of the 
financial sector, financial inclusion policies 
have far and wide positive impacts and 
correlations in the socioeconomic domain. 
Financial inclusion is referred in the targets 
of eight out of the seventeen United Nations 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 12, 
namely, SDG-1 on eradicating poverty, SDG-
2 on ending hunger, achieving food security, 
and promoting sustainable agriculture, 
SDG-3 on promoting health and well-being, 
SDG-5 on achieving gender equality and 
economic empowerment of women, SDG-
8 on promoting economic growth and jobs, 
SDG-9 on supporting industry, innovation and 
infrastructure, SDG-10 on reducing inequality, 
and SDG-17 on strengthening the means of 
implementation (Table III.1). 
2. Financial inclusion being an aspirational 
journey starts from creating opportunities for 
access to the formal financial system for the 
hitherto excluded and underserved segments, 
but its mandate goes beyond access to 
ensure effective usage of financial services to 
the benefit of people. Effective usage requires 
that people have an economic case for using 
the formal financial services which primarily 
comes from their capacity to have regular 
income/cash flow through employment, 
livelihood, etc., and have a perceptible 
economic incentive for using formal financial 
services. 
3. The sustenance and growth of usage also 
require continued trust of the people, suitability 
of products and services, sound financial 
literacy, a pro-active/quick grievance redressal 
mechanism, and a positive perception of being 
heard, which are some of the quality aspects 
of financial inclusion. 
4. Seen in the above context and in accordance 
with the role of financial inclusion in the 
achievement of sustainable development 
goals, it is obvious that financial inclusion 
is not just an end in itself but a means to a 
greater end of ensuring the overall wellbeing 
of people.
Table III.1: Role of FI Policies in Specific SDGs and Targets
SDG 1: Poverty Reduction
Financial inclusion by improving access to financial services and skilling/livelihood opportu -
nities helps to improve the sustenance, sufficiency, and safety of income, thereby helping to 
reduce poverty.


--- PAGE 30 ---
30
National Strategy for Financial Inclusion 2025-30
SDG 2: Ending Hunger
An inclusive financial system incentivises credit led investments for adoption of sustainable 
and productivity enhancing agricultural practices, which results in better agricultural yields. 
Thereby, helping in reducing hunger due to enhanced food security.
SDG 3: Health and Wellbeing
Financial inclusion through its multi-faceted socio-economic dimensions aids human devel -
opment and augments resilience of the marginalised and vulnerable, thereby fostering health 
and well-being.
SDG 5: Gender Equality
Gender sensitive financial inclusion policies decrease gender inequality by empowering wom-
en and improving their overall socio-economic status.
SDG 8: Decent Work and Economic Growth
Financial inclusion with its ecosystem approach supports economic growth by providing nec-
essary funding, augmenting employment, and entrepreneurship, and boosting consumption. 
SDG 9: Industry, Innovation, and Infrastructure
Financial inclusion policies support the industry, especially the micro and small enterprises by 
providing credit linkages and digital infrastructure for promoting innovation and boosting their 
progress.
SDG 10: Reducing Inequalities
Financial inclusion policies with their specific focus on the upliftment of the poor, marginalised, 
and vulnerable segments, and the last mile reach, help to reduce inequalities.
SDG 17: Strengthening the means of Implementation
Financial inclusion is an important means of implementation for achieving SDGs, through mo-
bilization of savings/investments and boosting consumption, and improving overall wellbeing 
of people, that can help in achieving broader developmental goals.
Definition of Financial Inclusion
5. The Committee on Financial Inclusion 
(Chairman: Dr C Rangarajan, RBI, 2008) 
defined financial inclusion as “the process of 
ensuring access to financial services, timely 
and adequate credit for vulnerable groups 
such as weaker sections and low-income 
groups at an affordable cost”. 
6. Further, the Committee on Medium-Term 
Path to Financial Inclusion (Chairman: Shri 
Deepak Mohanty, RBI, 2015) viewed financial 
inclusion as, “convenient access to a basket 


--- PAGE 31 ---
31
CHAPTER - III
of basic formal financial products and services 
that should include savings, remittance, credit, 
government-supported insurance and pension 
products to small and marginal farmers 
and low income households at reasonable 
cost with adequate protection progressively 
supplemented by social cash transfers, 
besides increasing the access of small and 
marginal enterprises to formal finance with a 
greater reliance on technology to cut costs 
and improve service delivery.”
7. The NSFI (2019-24) aimed at broadening, 
deepening, and accelerating financial 
inclusion alongside promoting financial 
literacy and consumer protection, with a view 
to promoting economic wellbeing, prosperity, 
and sustainable development. 
8. Continuing the journey and leveraging the 
substantial gains during the last decade in the 
bank account ownership to near saturation, 
robust expansion in physical and digital access 
infrastructure, and improvements in customer 
awareness and protection measures, it is 
desirable to upscale the focus of financial 
inclusion by adopting a synergistic ecosystem 
approach. This would ensure integrated and 
seamless involvement of stakeholders for 
developing a truly inclusive financial system 
towards wellbeing of people by minimization 
of inequality of opportunities for people to 
reap the benefits of access to formal financial 
system, while substantially improving the 
quality and consistency of last mile reach. 
9. Financial inclusion policies duly integrated 
with livelihood support, market linkages, 
financial education, and customer protection 
initiatives are great enablers of an improved 
state of the economic wellbeing of people. 
Pursued holistically, financial inclusion 
can lead to desirable outcomes in form of 
a quadrangle of financial safety, financial 
security, financial resilience, and financial 
discipline, in turn contributing towards overall 
wellbeing of people. 
10. Hence, the objectives and intended 
outcome of financial inclusion to be pursued 
under NSFI: 2025-30 are presented below. 
Figure III.1 provides a diagrammatic 
presentation of components and outcome of 
financial inclusion.
The objective of financial inclusion 
is ensuring availability of equitable, 
responsible, suitable, and affordable 
access to a bouquet of formal financial 
services, namely, savings, payments, 
remittances, credit, investments, 
insurance, and pension, across socio-
economic and geographical strata, 
coupled with effective financial literacy, 
robust consumer awareness and 
customer protection measures. 
Financial inclusion, as above, with the 
involvement of all stakeholders improves 
financial safety, financial security, 
financial resilience, and financial 
discipline of individuals (households) 
and micro-enterprises.
11. To explain, the usage of terms regarding 
access to a bouquet of financial services in 
the above definition would generally mean the 
following – 
a) Equitable – The access infrastructure 
should be available across the geographic 
strata in a reasonably homogeneous manner. 


--- PAGE 32 ---
32
National Strategy for Financial Inclusion 2025-30
b) Responsible – The financial service 
providers should ensure that their products/ 
services do not manipulate or impede 
customers’ free choices, interests, and 
right to product suitability, and do not leave 
customers’ worse off in terms of the economic, 
behavioural, and social outcomes.
c) Suitable – Financial products and services 
should be appropriate to customers need and 
based on customers’ financial circumstances 
and understanding. Differentiated/customised 
services should be available to enable people 
to choose what is best for them.
d) Affordable – The basic minimum financial 
services (basic transaction account, basic 
savings and investment account, small value 
remittances, small value digital payments, 
etc.) should be offered free of cost. Pricing 
of other services should have an essential 
element of affordability keeping in mind the 
marginal cost of services.
12. The quadrangle of financial safety, 
security, resilience, and discipline positioned 
as the outcome of financial inclusion rests on 
specific anchors presented in Table III.1. 
FI Ecosystem
13. As already discussed, an ecosystem 
approach to financial inclusion is required 
for ensuring an integrated and synergistic 
involvement of stakeholders for effectiveness 
in financial inclusion initiatives and outcomes. 
Hence, a clear understanding and definition 
of financial inclusion (FI) ecosystem could 
be helpful for a seamless working towards 
achieving the shared goals. 
14. FI ecosystem refers to a synergised 
network of stakeholders working and/or 
connected with financial inclusion initiatives 
and its outcome in form of wellbeing of people 
in terms of quadrangle of financial - safety, 
security, resilience, and discipline. Seamless 
and synergised functioning of the ecosystem 
comprising of stakeholders, namely, banks/ 
Figure III.1: Financial Inclusion: Components and Outcomes



--- PAGE 33 ---
33
CHAPTER - III
Table III.1: The quadrangle of financial safety, security, resilience, and discipline and 
their anchors.
Dimension Anchors Explanatory Details on Anchors
Financial 
Safety – 
“Smoothly 
managing 
day-to-day 
transactions” Suitable 
Access. 
Livelihood 
Support.
Customer 
Protection.
- Fair, suitable, and affordable financial products and 
services.
- Quick, simple, and efficient grievance redressal 
mechanism.
- Meeting basic subsistence needs (minimum basic needs 
for day-to-day life – food, shelter, education, travel, etc., at 
a household level).
- Regular and sustained income stream through wage or 
non-wage livelihood.
Financial 
Security – 
“Ability to meet 
any contingency”
- Regular Savings – Liquid (for at least two-months’ 
average household expenses) and Long-Term (in form of 
physical/financial assets).
- Continued subscription of any pension scheme 
(retirement pension/ Atal pension Yojana/ other social 
security pensions).
- Effective ex ante Customer Protection Measures and 
Deposit Insurance.
Financial 
Resilience - 
“Ability to 
recover from 
financial 
setbacks”
Insurance 
Coverage.
Credit 
Facilities.
- Unexpired insurance coverage within acceptable/ 
bearable cost – life coverage, health coverage, asset 
coverage (vehicles/property/machines, etc.).
- Fair Emergency Credit to reasonably cope with a financial 
setback/sudden difficult situation such as, loss of life/ 
livelihood/assets without excessive debt burden or losses 
impeding day-to-day life.
Financial 
Discipline – 
“Attitude and 
behaviour 
towards a steady 
financial future”
Financial 
Education.
Experiential 
Learning
- Financial Awareness and Confidence.
- Diversified Investments - Distributing savings /
investments across different banks/asset classes.
- Sustainable Indebtedness - monthly repayment amount 
towards outstanding loans not exceeding half of the 
monthly income of the household.
- Realistic Goal Setting and Planning - Making financial 
goals within one’s means, and planning for future 
expenses/ life-events (education/ marriage of children, 
retirement, etc.)


--- PAGE 34 ---
34
National Strategy for Financial Inclusion 2025-30
13 Livelihood opportunity providers are the entities/institutions which offer support for wage employment and self-employment to unskilled, semi-skilled, and skilled 
workers. For instance, services aggregators, NRLM, NULM, etc.
financial institutions including NABARD, SIDBI 
etc., central government, state governments, 
financial sector regulators, SROs/IBA, private 
players including fintech companies, think 
tanks, academia, community organizations, 
centres for financial literacy and NCFE, 
livelihood opportunity providers 13, and skilling 
institutions, is essential for effectiveness and 
outcome orientation in financial inclusion 
policies (Figure III.2). 
Figure III.2: Financial Inclusion (FI) Ecosystem
Vision of NSFI (2025-30)
15. Following the above discussions, the 
vision of NSFI is as under – 
To strengthen the financial inclusion 
ecosystem with the synergised efforts 
of stakeholders towards wellbeing of 
people by ensuring delivery of equitable, 
responsible, suitable, and affordable 
financial services duly supported by 
livelihood enablers, effective financial 
literacy, digital public infrastructure, and 
robust customer protection. 
16. The current iteration of the National 
Strategy for Financial Inclusion for the period 
2025-30 (NSFI: 2025-30) is an outcome of 
wide-ranging stakeholder consultations. The 
strategy is informed of the achievements of 
the NSFI 2019-24 and focusses on further 
deepening, sustaining, and synergising 
financial inclusion initiatives.


--- PAGE 35 ---
35
CHAPTER – IV 
NSFI (2025-30): STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND 
ACTION POINTS
As discussed in Chapter III, National Strategy 
for Financial Inclusion (NSFI) intends to 
achieve integrated, seamless, and synergised 
working of stakeholders of the FI ecosystem 
to augment the effectiveness of financial 
inclusion policies through the availability and 
use of equitable, responsible, and affordable 
financial services along with skilling/livelihood 
opportunities, duly supported by Digital Public 
Infrastructure, effective financial literacy, 
robust consumer awareness and protection 
measures.
2. The timeline of NSFI: 2025-30 is 
synchronized with the 2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development adopted by 193 
Member States at the UN General Assembly 
Summit in September 2015, and which came 
into effect on January 01, 2016. The principle 
of universality: ‘Leave No One Behind’ and 
omni-dimensional development as the global 
agenda for 2030, fits perfectly well with the 
outcome-oriented financial inclusion goals 
intended towards ensuring wellbeing of 
people. 
3. As India’s contribution is critical to the global 
achievement of SDGs, the strategy intends 
to meet the national priorities and assist in 
the achievement of targets as a part of the 
transformative agenda, which recognizes that 
it is no longer sufficient to focus on economic 
growth, but on fairer and more equal societies, 
and a safer and more prosperous planet. 
NSFI’s ecosystem approach as discussed 
in the Chapter-III bodes well with the SDG’s 
philosophy, namely, coordinated efforts by all 
the stakeholders to achieve the developmental 
agenda of leaving no one behind, seeking 
participation of everyone - everywhere, 
especially the vulnerable and marginalised. 
NSFI Strategic Objectives: 
Elevating the State of Financial 
Inclusion through Panch Jyoti 
(पंच ज्योति)14 
4. As discussed in Chapter-III, a quadrangle 
of financial safety, security, resilience, and 
discipline towards well-being of people 
is positioned as the outcome of financial 
inclusion. NSFI: 2025-30, learning from the 
impediments and leveraging upon the gains 
during 2019-24, sets up the following five 
strategic and synergised objectives (Panch-
Jyoti), which would help in elevating the state 
of financial inclusion in the country. 
I. Improving the availability and use of 
Equitable, Responsible, Suitable, and 
Affordable Bouquet of Financial Services 
to achieve Financial Safety and Financial 
Security for households and micro enterprises.
II. Adopting Gender-Sensitive Approach 
for Women-led Financial Inclusion and 
Differentiated Strategies for Improving 
Financial Resilience of Households, especially 
for the Underserved and Vulnerable segments.
14 The Panch Jyoti intends to elevate the level of financial inclusion in the country. The analogy comes from a lamp with five different lighting wicks synergically 
integrated as a single source of illumination. 


--- PAGE 36 ---
36
National Strategy for Financial Inclusion 2025-30
III. Synergizing Livelihood, Skill Development 
and Support Ecosystem and its linkages with 
Financial Inclusion.
IV. Leveraging Financial Education as a tool 
for promoting Financial Discipline.
V. Strengthening the Quality and Reliability of 
Customer Protection and Grievance Redressal 
Measures.
5. Linkages of the above strategic objectives 
and related action points with the impediments 
and challenges as discussed in Chapter-II, as 
also the stakeholder wise action points are 
presented in Table IV.1 and IV.2, at the end 
of this chapter. FI-dimensions wise distribution 
matrix of the action points is presented in Table 
IV.3. A detailed description of the strategic 
objectives in terms of recommendations and 
action points follows. 
I. Improving the availability and use of 
Equitable, Responsible, Suitable, and 
Affordable Bouquet of Financial Services 
to achieve Financial Safety and Financial 
Security for households and micro 
enterprises.
Under the NSFI: 2019-24, with emphasis 
on the last mile delivery of formal financial 
services, significant progress has been 
made in providing some form of banking 
access, within a radius of 5 KM/ hamlet of 
500 households, in more than 99.9 percent 
of the 1.21 lakh identified villages. Besides, 
a slew of measures was undertaken towards 
strengthening the Business Correspondent 
(BC) channel for the last mile access. However, 
a supply side assessment reveal that the 
quality, consistency, and breadth of services 
available at the last mile, uniformly, may not 
be as expected due to low population density 
in certain pockets, geographical remoteness, 
relatively lesser economic potential, and lack 
of economic viability for financial services 
providers, and infrastructural bottlenecks 
(connectivity, electricity, roads, etc.), hence, 
requiring improvements.
Digital financial services operating on the 
backbone of Digital Public Infrastructure 
(DPI) have provided a significant fillip to 
financial inclusion initiatives across a wide 
spectrum ranging from account ownership, 
social benefit transfers, quicker and efficient 
remittances/payments, and access to credit. 
DPI, as interoperable, open, and inclusive 
systems supported by technology, serves 
to provide essential public and private 
services for the common good. The India 
Stack exemplifies this approach, combining 
digital ID, interoperable payments, a digital 
credentials ledger, and account aggregation 
framework. By leveraging the gains made, 
there is scope for further expanding the digital 
footprints for discharge of a range of financial 
services. 
Recommendation:
It is recommended to improve the equity, 
reach, consistency, and quality of last mile 
access by strengthening the network of 
business correspondents and expanding 
the delivery of safe and cost-effective digital 
financial services at the last mile.
Action Points:
1. Improving equity, reach, consistency, 
and quality of last mile access
To bring about substantial improvements in 
the equity, reach, consistency, and quality of 


--- PAGE 37 ---
37
CHAPTER - IV
last mile access to financial services, there is 
a need to ensure availability of at least one 
banking outlet – branch /digital banking unit 
(DBU)/ fixed point business correspondent 
outlet (FBC) 15 in each revenue centre 16, so 
that financial services are fairly and equitably 
available across the depth and breadth of the 
country. Such outlets, under adequate control 
and oversight of banks, are expected to provide 
a minimum standard set of financial services, 
namely, deposits, withdrawals, remittances, 
account opening and servicing, Jan Suraksha 
Schemes, loan leads/applications, pension 
schemes, etc. This would be a substantial 
value addition to the work on ‘universal access’ 
wherein access to some form of banking 
services has been provided to 99.9 per cent 
of the targeted villages within 5 KM radius/ 
hamlets with 500 households in hilly areas. 
SLBCs/UTLBCs should put in place an action 
plan and allocate goals to banks in a phased 
manner to achieve the action point during the 
period of the strategy, with suitable mid-term 
goals.
2. Incentive mechanism for BC agents from 
hilly and rural areas
With inadequacies of bank branches 17 in the 
north eastern (NE)/ hilly states, and rural areas, 
banking services are mostly dependent upon 
the BC outlets. Further, owing to topographic 
conditions of hilly regions, the distribution of 
FBCs, especially in the NE region is skewed 
with only 165 FBCs per thousand square 
kilometres vis-à-vis 379 FBCs per thousand 
square kilometres at the national level 18. 
Skewed population density and sparse 
availability of access points is also reflected 
in lower number of transactions at BC points. 
Since, remuneration of BCs depends on the 
volume of transactions, viability of BC business 
in the region gets impacted due to sparse 
population and difficult terrain leading to high 
level of inactivity and consequent negative 
impact on financial inclusion outcomes. 
Accordingly, to improve the availability and 
consistency of last mile access in hilly and 
rural areas, the existing scheme of incentives, 
under Financial Inclusion Fund (FIF), to BCs 
operating in Tier V & Tier VI centres in NE 
States and other Hilly States/UTs (Himachal 
Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Ladakh & 
Uttarakhand) may be extended in a calibrated 
manner to all Fixed-Point BCs 19 operating in 
Tier VI centres. 
3. Strengthening the Remuneration 
Structure of BCs.
To ensure quality and consistency in delivery 
of financial services at the last mile, fair 
and reasonable remuneration structure for 
BC agents is a must. Notwithstanding the 
regulatory prescriptions, and in view of the 
prevailing varied practices, a fair remuneration 
15 Working for a minimum of 4 hours per day for at least five days a week.
16 Revenue Centre is defined as the revenue unit (and not just the locality) classified and delineated by the respective State Government, i.e., a revenue village/ 
city/ town/ municipality/ municipal corporation, etc., as the case may be. Based on the size of the population, a revenue centre is classified into rural, semi-urban, 
urban, or metropolitan as under:
i. Rural: population less than 10,000.
ii. Semi-Urban: 10,000 and above and less than 1 lakh.
iii. Urban: 1 lakh and above and less than 10 lakhs.
iv. Metropolitan: 10 lakhs and above.
Source: Guidelines for Identifying Census Centres -
https://www.rbi.org.in/scripts/bs_viewcontent.aspx?Id=2035#:~:text=Census%202011%20in%20proforma%20I,which%20the%20branch%20is%20situated
17 The number of bank branches per thousand square km, on an all-India basis, is 51, but the same is only 18 for rural areas. For hilly regions, there are 30 
bank branches per thousand square km area. [Source – DBIE (Mar 24) /Census 2011 Data]
18 As on March 2024
19 Working for a minimum of 4 hours per day for at least five days a week.


--- PAGE 38 ---
38
National Strategy for Financial Inclusion 2025-30
structure of BC agents relating to banking 
products and services may be worked out 
under the aegis of Indian Banks Association 
(IBA). 
4. Expanding the scope of services and 
improve the sustenance of BC operations.
(a) To augment the scope of services offered 
by FBCs20 and to improve their sustenance in 
terms of earning potential, financial services 
providers should consider offering additional/
value-added services through well-functioning 
BCs, based on an objective and transparent 
performance criterion, while meeting 
regulatory norms.
(b) The network of well-functioning FBCs 
may be leveraged for offering additional basic 
financial services, namely, basic mutual fund, 
pension and insurance products and related 
services, subject to meeting requisite criteria 
and regulatory norms.
5. Strengthening of BC Registry
The existing BC registry portal being maintained 
by IBA provides a dynamic and comprehensive 
dataset to monitor the operations of BCs with 
a view to ensuring quality and last mile reach. 
IBA should further strengthen and develop 
additional capabilities in the registry portal to 
improve periodic updation of the data, location 
mapping, de-duplication, certification status, 
etc. This would enhance the functionalities 
and effectiveness of the portal.
6. Expanding Digital Financial Services
(a) Reaching one billion users in digital 
payments
UPI recorded nearly 16.7 billion transactions 
during the month of December 2024 21. There 
were 424 million unique UPI users in June 
202422. In this backdrop, it is desirable that 
the coverage of digital payments, led by UPI, 
is expanded to cover most of the population. 
Therefore, the goal of reaching one billion 
users in digital payments ecosystem by 
December 2029 may guide further efforts in 
expanding the reach of such payment modes.
(b) Expanding and Deepening Digital 
Payment Ecosystem (EDDPE) 
Expanding and Deepening of Digital Payments 
Ecosystem (EDDPE) programme, which 
aims at providing every eligible individual in 
identified districts at least one mode of digital 
payments namely, debit/rupay cards, net 
banking, mobile banking, UPI, USSD, AEPS 
etc., is underway. Considering the ongoing 
work, EDDPE should aim to achieve – (i) 
100% coverage in 80% of districts by March 
2026, and (ii) 100% coverage in all identified 
districts by March 2027.
(c) Programmable CBDC to Facilitate 
Targeted Credit Flow and Expand Access
Programmability feature in Central Bank 
Digital Currency (CBDC) could help in tying up 
the end use. For example, agriculture credit 
by banks using CBDC can be programmed 
to ensure its use only at input store outlets. 
Similarly, for MSMEs etc., programmability 
may take care of the issue of diversion of funds 
and ensure optimum utilisation. This may help 
in ensuring the end-use which banks have to 
continuously grapple with across the globe. 
20 Ibid
21 Payment System Indicators – Dec 2024, https://www.rbi.org.in/Scripts/PSIUserView.aspx?Id=43
22 Report on Currency and Finance 2023-24 (page 9) - Data as of June 2024


--- PAGE 39 ---
39
CHAPTER - IV
Accordingly, programmable CBDC may 
be leveraged to facilitate credit flow to 
underserved segments like tenant farmers, 
micro enterprises, etc., by conducting pilots 
of programmable CBDC across various 
borrower segments. Offline functionality in use 
cases may also be explored to make CBDC 
accessible to individuals in areas with limited 
or no connectivity.
(d) Unified Lending Interface (ULI)
With rapid progress in digitalisation, India has 
embraced Digital Public Infrastructure (DPI) 
which has enabled convenience, transparency, 
and enhanced efficiency for all citizens across 
digital identity, payments, and other financial 
and non-financial services. While diverse 
sources of financial and non-financial data 
required by lenders for digital credit delivery 
may exist, it often lies in silos across different 
entities, which lenders, as part of their credit 
underwriting, need to individually connect 
with all these data sources, making it highly 
cumbersome and costly.
Unified Lending Interface (ULI), as a DPI, 
has been conceptualised to enable delivery 
of frictionless credit by facilitating seamless 
flow of required digital information to lenders 
through conduct of pilots on various loan 
journeys, while onboarding of more and more 
lenders and data service providers. ULI may 
be rolled out in a phased manner.
(e) Onboarding of all banks and insurance 
companies to Jansuraksha Portal and 
improving coverage of Atal Pension Yojana 
(APY).
Jansuraksha portal provides access to Social 
Security Insurance Schemes introduced by the 
Government of India. It is an end-to-end portal 
for enrolments and claims under Pradhan 
Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana (PMSBY), and 
Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana 
(PMJJBY).
Accordingly, all banks and insurance companies 
should be onboarded to the Jansuraksha portal 
to provide a seamless digital journey for the 
subscribers for enrolments, issuance of policy 
certificates and claims processing. Improved 
efficiency and transparency of transactions 
through the portal would augment trust in the 
schemes and help increasing the coverage 
level in a systematic manner. Further, sectoral 
regulator and FSPs should make concerted 
efforts to improve the coverage of APY by 
strengthening its distribution network and 
creating awareness.
(f) Simpler Digital Interface and Use of AI
Complex and confusing digital interfaces 
coupled with language barriers may deter fair 
customer choices and impede the uptake of 
usage. Accordingly, financial service providers 
should improve and simplify interfaces of 
digital channels to facilitate ease of use and 
address the language barrier by supporting 
digital transaction interfaces in vernacular 
languages. 
For this, awareness of the AI powered 
language translation platform like Bhashini 
may be developed among users and financial 
service providers for its integration into 
financial services.
7. Micro Enterprises to receive focussed 
attention
New-to-credit micro enterprises, especially 
those onboarded through Udyam Assist 
Platform, should be supported by financial 


--- PAGE 40 ---
40
National Strategy for Financial Inclusion 2025-30
services providers to mitigate their difficulties 
in access to credit due to insufficient financial 
records/history by adopting innovative 
solutions such as digital credit platforms, 
simplified application processes, automated 
business plan generation, alternative data for 
credit assessments and tailored repayment 
schedules. 
8. Role of Self-Regulatory Organisations
Self-Regulatory Organisation (SRO) in the 
fintech sector (SRO-FT), microfinance sector 
and other domains may endeavour to promote 
the extension of responsible, suitable, and 
affordable financial products/services and 
adoption of financial inclusion policies by their 
member entities, by incorporating suitable 
provisions in the code of conduct for members.
II. Adopting Gender-Sensitive Approach 
for Women-led Financial Inclusion and 
Differentiated Strategies for Improving 
Financial Resilience of Households, 
especially the Underserved and 
Vulnerable Segments. 
Over the past several years, the Government 
and financial service providers in India 
have made significant strides in creating 
opportunities to increase women’s financial 
inclusion. Adoption of gender sensitive 
approach is needed to augment and promote 
women agency in the FI ecosystem to take 
advantage of women-led financial inclusion 
and extension initiatives.
One of the demand side impediments to the 
usage of financial services stem from the 
fact that people from different geographic/
demographic/economic strata have varying 
needs and sensitivities regarding usage of 
financial services, and hence, to be effective, 
financial inclusion policies must facilitate 
a differentiated approach towards suitable 
customization and delivery of financial 
products and services in accordance with the 
needs and preferences of the end-users. 
Recommendation:
Adoption of a gender sensitive approach 
is recommended to strengthen women led 
financial inclusion and extension initiatives 
for the improved outcomes, besides following 
a differentiated approach towards delivery 
of financial services for underserved and 
vulnerable segments.
Action Points:
1. Increasing the share of women business 
correspondents
Going beyond greater participation of women 
in the financial services as users of financial 
services, there is a need to promote and 
encourage women as facilitators of financial 
services by increasing their numbers as 
business correspondent agents. 
The goal would be to ensure at least 30% 
share of women BCs in the medium term from 
the current level of around 15% 23. SLBCs/
UTLBCs should put in place a voluntary action 
plan adopted by member banks to deploy 
women as business correspondents in a 
phased manner to achieve the milestone by 
December 2028.
23 As on April 22, 2025 – IBA BC registry Portal


--- PAGE 41 ---
41
CHAPTER - IV
2. Identification of Vulnerable / Underserved 
Segments for focused services
With a view to providing suitable and timely 
financial services to the underserved and 
vulnerable segments, there is a need to 
develop suitable markers/matrix to be followed 
by financial services providers in dealing with 
such customers. Accordingly, financial sector 
regulators may develop an identification matrix 
both based on a combination of categorical 
and circumstantial factors24. 
3. Differentiated products and delivery 
channel for vulnerable segments
(a) Going beyond the approach of offering 
low-cost universal financial products and 
services to promote financial inclusion, there 
is a need to focus on product suitability and 
personal suitability, especially for underserved 
and vulnerable segments. Accordingly, 
financial services providers should develop 
suitable basket of products (such as, basic 
MF products, calamity insurance, etc.) to meet 
the requirements of such segments. Financial 
sector regulators may appropriately mandate 
the development of such products.
(b) To strengthen financial security and 
financial resilience of people, suitable bundled 
products may be developed in the investment, 
pension, and insurance domains (e.g., a 
single insurance product offering life, health, 
accident, and property cover).
(c) To strengthen financial resilience of people, 
suitable and fair credit products with easier 
documentation process and quick disbursals 
should be launched especially for small ticket 
loans to prevent people from having to access 
informal sources of finance/ unauthorized 
digital lenders, etc. for small and urgent credit 
requirements. 
(d) To further strengthen the institutional means 
for provision of fair and easy emergency credit, 
an overdraft facility25 charged at a reasonable 
interest rate may be made a default product 
feature in all Aadhar-seeded BSBD Accounts 
(to avoid duplication) after regular operation of 
the account for at least six months. 
III. Synergizing Livelihood, Skill 
Development and Support Ecosystem 
and its linkages with Financial Inclusion.
One of the significant demand-side attributes 
of effective financial inclusion is sustenance, 
regularity, and sufficiency of income to 
smoothly meet basic subsistence needs 
and the ability to make some savings. The 
sustenance and basic sufficiency of income 
are core elements of financial safety. This, in 
turn, depends upon meaningful employment, 
entrepreneurial pursuits, market linkages, etc. 
for which livelihood and skilling opportunities 
are of utmost importance. 
Sustenance and deepening of the skilling for 
livelihood ecosystem requires backward and 
forward linkages in the financial inclusion 
ecosystem, and integrated efforts to improve 
the outcomes. The nature of the tasks in 
financial inclusion initiatives is such that 
there is a need for interconnectedness and 
synergy amongst various stakeholders for the 
24 Illustratively, categorical factors, such as people of certain age groups (young adults, and super senior citizens), people with low education, differently-abled 
people, occupational migrants, etc., and circumstantial factors, such as, loss of life, livelihood, and assets due to natural/physical disasters, people facing a 
situation of over-indebtedness, etc. could be selected for development of common principles/parameters to be followed by all financial services providers for the 
ease of their onboarding, transactions and sustenance of delivery of financial services to such segments.
25 For instance, an overdraft (OD) facility up to Rs. 10,000 is available to PMJDY account holders. (https://www.pmjdy.gov.in/scheme)


--- PAGE 42 ---
42
National Strategy for Financial Inclusion 2025-30
sustenance of employment, market linkages, 
suitable funding, awareness, and handholding. 
Recommendation:
Leveraging Skill India Digital Hub and local 
community organizations is recommended 
for augmenting synergy and convergence in 
the skilling and livelihood ecosystem to plug 
gaps in credit/market linkages and mitigate 
demographic/geographic inequalities to 
improve employability, and entrepreneurial 
opportunities to facilitate better income 
earning capabilities, in turn leading to 
effective access and usage of financial 
services.
Action Points:
1. Content Development and Delivery for 
Skill Training 
(a) NSDC, with its mandate of catalysing the 
skilling ecosystem for last mile participation 
and as the strategic implementation and 
knowledge partner to Skill India Mission, 
may act as the nodal agency for developing 
content and arranging skill training across 
the skilling and livelihood ecosystem. New 
content development and/or updation of 
existing content on financial literacy included 
in the skill development programme may be 
undertaken in consultation with NCFE.
(b) NSDC may steer the adoption of National 
Skills Qualifications Framework (NSQF) by all 
skill training institutions to enable individuals 
to acquire desired competency levels, to 
enhance employability potential. Skill training 
curriculum should be made available in all 
scheduled languages on the Skill India Digital 
Hub and be readily accessible to all.
(c) NSDC may lead the efforts to synergize 
the resources of all skill training entities 
(RSETIs, JSS, PMKVY, NISEBUD, Skill India 
Centers, ITIs, Skill and Vocational Colleges, 
etc.) through onboarding and data sharing on 
the Skill India Digital Hub. A gender-sensitive 
approach may be adopted by all the skilling 
and livelihood institutions to help in achieving 
the national target under SDG-2030 (SDG-5).
2. Data Sharing and Reporting
NSDC may leverage Skill India Digital Hub 
to collate and publish periodic reports on 
numbers and types of skill training conducted 
by various skilling/training entities and their 
settlement. Skilling and settlement initiatives 
under other Government programmes such as 
NRLM and NULM, including financial literacy 
focused training for SHG members, may be 
integrated into the database in due course, to 
have complete pan-India data on the skilling 
and livelihood ecosystem.
3. Funding and Financial Support to Skill 
Trained Individuals
(a) Information on skill loan schemes of NSDC, 
Government of India and State Governments 
may be made available widely, including 
by participating financial sector entities, to 
encourage individuals to enroll for suitable 
skill training with financial support. 
(b) Potential Linked Plan (PLP) of each district 
under respective State/UTs should have a 
suitable allocation for the individuals trained by 
recognised skill training institutions (R-SETIs, 
PMKVY, JSS etc.) to enable credit support to 
such individuals by banks. Trained candidates 
must be provided with the necessary support 
through handholding arrangements in 
approaching financial institutions for credit 
facilities. 


--- PAGE 43 ---
43
CHAPTER - IV
4. Leveraging Local Community 
Organizations
To involve local communities for social 
intermediation by way of a structured 
mechanism to synergise the efforts made 
by various stakeholders through a trusted-
assisted middle layer of social infrastructure in 
form of Community Resource Entities (CREs). 
CREs refer to locally rooted community 
organizations, such as cooperatives, trusts/
societies, and NGOs, that would provide social 
intermediation within skilling for livelihood 
ecosystem. 
The purpose of CREs is to create synergy in 
the financial inclusion ecosystem by offering 
community-oriented intermediation and 
localized support for facilitating access to 
skilling/livelihood, market linkages, and bank 
credit. It would create a trusted-assisted 
middle layer in form of a social infrastructure 
to undertake the following functions. 
a. Assessment of training gap - CREs will 
collect data of unemployed, underemployed, 
school dropouts and other in need for skill 
training via survey or through participatory 
identification process.
b. Liaison with skill training entities – CREs 
should have appropriate linkages with relevant 
skill training agencies, potential employers, 
and banks.
c. CREs should map training needs of the 
locality with respective skill development 
institutions. 
d. Handholding of trained individuals after 
completion of training and providing support 
for employment/entrepreneurship and funding.
CREs being locally rooted will have the 
capacity to mobilize individuals and gain the 
trust of the local communities. By engaging 
with the community, CREs would act as a 
bridge between the skilling centers, banks, 
and livelihood providers/ employers on one 
end, and aspirants on the other end, thereby 
providing a broader spectrum of forward and 
backward linkages while reducing information 
asymmetry in the FI ecosystem. 
A small-scale pilot on operationalizing CREs 
may be undertaken to assess workability of 
the concept. Further action on implementation 
may be decided based on findings and 
evaluation of the pilot phase.
IV. Leveraging Financial Education as a 
Tool for Promoting Financial Discipline.
Financial Discipline as an integral element 
of wellbeing of people is manifested in their 
financial behaviour, namely, knowledge and 
awareness, decision-making, choices and 
outlook, dependence, influence, etc. To 
some extent, financial discipline depends 
on the innate cognitive characteristics of 
individuals, however, to a large extent financial 
discipline could be a learned behaviour with 
identifiable markers, namely, a) financial 
knowledge, b) sustainable indebtedness, c) 
realistic goal setting, d) financial planning, 
and e) diversification of savings/investments. 
Accordingly, financial education could be 
leveraged to work on the above markers.


--- PAGE 44 ---
44
National Strategy for Financial Inclusion 2025-30
Recommendation:
Considering financial discipline essentially 
as a learned behaviour, financial education/
literacy mechanisms may be leveraged to go 
beyond the creation of awareness in general 
and aim at improving financial discipline 
amongst households. Accordingly, the 
financial education/literacy initiatives should 
have an additional targeted focus on the 
following three dimensions.
a) Providing context and process-oriented 
financial knowledge 26 with suitably 
differentiated content and differentiated 
delivery models, beyond broad conceptual 
awareness, for effectuating enhanced and 
safe usage of financial services.
b) Promoting sustainable indebtedness and 
guarding against over-indebtedness with a 
focus on highlighting risks of repaying loans 
through fresh borrowings, and repayment 
obligations exceeding half27 of the income. 
c) Encouraging and emphasizing the 
importance of realistic financial goal setting 
and financial planning for the wellbeing 
of the households, besides the need for 
diversification of savings/investments.
Action Points: 
1. Sustaining and deepening financial 
literacy initiatives. 
To sustain efforts of financial literacy through 
constant policy review of dissemination 
channels such as Centres of Financial Literacy 
(CFL) and Financial Literacy Centres (FLCs) 
along with supplementing efforts in capacity 
building, content updation, etc.
2. Targeted Financial Literacy Initiatives 
(a) Differentiated content and focused delivery 
channels could make the dissemination of 
financial literacy more meaningful by involving 
entities connected with the target segments 
with functional linkages and could further 
boost the quality and effectiveness of financial 
literacy extension initiatives. Accordingly, 
National Centre for Financial Education 
(NCFE) may conceptualise and execute an 
appropriate delivery model for targeted FL 
content to cater to the needs of students, 
elderly, migrants, differently abled, and other 
similar groups on a sustained basis. 
(b) In addition to existing CFL mechanism, 
financial literacy units may be established 
at select schools, colleges, farmer-
producer organizations (FPOs), community 
organisations, etc., to disseminate 
contextualised and focused FL content.
3. Improving Digital Literacy
Expansion in digital footprints of financial 
services requires upgrading the digital skills of 
the people, as lack of experience and comfort 
with digital devices and applications could 
make people vulnerable to frauds and hamper 
the progress of digital financial inclusion. 
Accordingly, NCFE and financial service 
providers may run focussed and innovative 
campaigns to augment digital literacy to 
enable people to identify attempts to defraud, 
while allaying the concerns of people relating 
to safety and security of digital transactions.
26 The awareness refers to a broad conceptual understanding, while knowledge is context and process specific and hands-on ability that can be put to use.
27 Para 5.2 (Limit on Loan Repayment Obligations of a Household) - Master Direction – Reserve Bank of India (Regulatory Framework for Microfinance Loans) 
Directions, 2022.


--- PAGE 45 ---
45
CHAPTER - IV
4. Development and dissemination of 
content on areas of emerging relevance
NCFE may develop suitable content on the 
following aspects for dissemination through 
Centers for Financial Literacy (CFLs), 
Financial Literacy Centers (FLCs), and other 
channels –  
(a) Promoting sustainable indebtedness 
and guarding against over-indebtedness in 
households. 
(b) Developing understanding about realistic 
financial goal setting, need for financial 
planning, and diversification of savings/
investments.
5. Periodic Assessment of the state of 
financial literacy.
(a) NCFE may conduct periodic surveys 
(including limited surveys covering specified 
segments) to assess the state of financial 
literacy and financial inclusion.
(b) Based on the gaps assessed through the 
survey findings, NCFE may conceptualise 
and execute awareness initiatives for specific 
regions/ groups.
6. Developing AI & ML-based public query 
systems on common banking and finance-
related aspects.
Considering the need for access to quick, 
correct, and authenticated information relating 
to financial services/products to protect 
customers from falling prey to grapevine, it is 
recommended that financial service providers 
should -  
(a) make available a duly authenticated 
public query systems for clarifying doubts and 
seeking information through their websites 
and social media extensions.
(b) conduct suitably positioned social media 
campaigns for effective dissemination of 
engaging content on consumer protection and 
grievance redressal measures.
V. Strengthening the Quality and 
Reliability of Customer Protection and 
Grievance Redressal Measures.
Consumer protection forms one of the core 
elements of the quality of financial inclusion, 
which instills trust and confidence amongst 
users of financial services. Robust consumer 
protection measures are needed so that 
users of financial services have adequate 
safeguards towards protection of their rights 
and interests.  Hence, specific measures are 
needed to strengthen the customer protection 
edifice.
Recommendation:
In order to cater to the various segments of 
populations in a cost-effective manner, banks 
have leveraged digital/fintech platforms to 
curate and deliver financial services/products. 
The extension of financial services has to be 
duly supported by easy, reliable, trusted, and 
effective customer protection and grievance 
redressal measures, as the effectiveness of 
customer protection remains at the core of 
the demand for financial services.
Action Points:
1. Improving Grievance Redress 
Mechanism - Reducing High Customer 
Burden in Redress Mechanism
(a) Simpler Solutions
In order to strengthen the demand for formal 


--- PAGE 46 ---
46
National Strategy for Financial Inclusion 2025-30
financial services and boost people’s trust in 
the system, grievance redressal processes at 
FSP’s end need to be made simpler so as to 
reduce the customer’s time and resources. In 
addition to existing grievance redressal portals 
and helpline numbers, simpler solutions may 
be adopted whereby an aggrieved customer 
only needs to dial a missed call service 
number without the need to go through a long 
winded and queued process. Such a missed 
call may prompt a call back from the service 
provider from a designated number to register 
and record the grievance to be acknowledged 
and progress updated through SMS in a time-
bound manner. Simple apps/solutions may 
also be developed, which support filing of 
complaints in regional languages for resolution 
by FSPs.
(b) Effective use of Citizen Financial 
Cyber Frauds Reporting and Management 
System (CFCFRMS) to attend cyber fraud 
complaints. 
To deal with the rising menace of financial 
frauds, a common integrated platform in 
the form of Citizen Financial Cyber Frauds 
Reporting and Management System 
(CFCFRMS) has been created, where 
all concerned stakeholders, namely, law 
enforcement agencies, banks, financial 
service providers, etc. work in tandem to 
ensure that quick, and system-based effective 
action is taken to prevent flow of money 
siphoned off from innocent citizens to the 
fraudsters. CFCFRMS receives complaints 
through helpline number 1930 or on National 
Cybercrime Reporting Portal (NCRP).
Banks should put in place a designated 
mechanism available in near real time for 
withholding/blocking the flow of funds against 
which a complaint ticket is raised in CFCFRMS.
(c) Board approved Customer Grievance 
Redress Policy
Financial sector regulators may ensure that 
all FSPs have a well-documented Board 
approved Customer Grievance Redress 
Policy, widely publicised and prominently 
displayed on their respective websites and a 
direct link to lodge a complaint may be provided 
at all customer interface points/media. Such 
information may also be made available 
in vernacular languages, and timeline and 
quality of resolution may be monitored by top 
management of the respective FSPs.
2. Strengthening Customer Protection 
Measures
(a) Digital Payments Intelligence Platform 
to Mitigate Payment Frauds
Sustaining confidence in digital services 
requires minimizing incidence of frauds. 
Since, many frauds occur by influencing 
unsuspecting victims to make the payment 
or share credentials, besides measures on 
an ongoing basis to protect customers from 
such frauds, there is a need for network-level 
intelligence and real-time data sharing across 
payment systems. Accordingly, advanced 
technologies may be harnessed to mitigate 
payment fraud risks through a special platform 
designed for the purpose, which may be 
operationalized by December 2026.
(b) Protection against dark patterns
With a view to protecting customers against 
dark patterns, which manipulate or impede 
customers’ choices and autonomy to their 
detriment, regulators may issue guidelines 


--- PAGE 47 ---
47
CHAPTER - IV
requiring financial service providers not to 
resort to dark patterns in their conduct and 
operations.
(c) Guardrails against Tech Innovations 
Technological innovations while facilitating 
access and usage of financial services also 
bring to fore unintended customer protection 
issues such as data breaches, manipulations, 
frauds, and unfair practices, etc., requiring 
suitable guardrails.
Regulators may leverage supervisory 
processes to bolster customer protection 
to ensure fair treatment of customers in 
the financial sector by adopting focussed 
supervisory methods, in tandem with the 
evolving financial landscape, as well as strict 
supervisory action in cases of non-adherence 
to regulatory framework for customer 
protection.  
(d) Use of pre-intimated official phone 
numbers by banks
One of the common modes used by fraudsters 
is to impersonate bank employees by phone 
calls/e-mails/SMSes targeting unsuspecting 
customers. Inability of customers to distinguish 
between a genuine phone call/SMS from 
bank and that from a fraudster impersonating 
a bank staff poses a serious risk to customer 
protection. 
Therefore, mechanism should be put in 
place requiring financial service providers to 
designate specific phone numbers/ email IDs 
from which customers/potential customers 
to be contacted. Such details should be 
prominently displayed in all their commercial 
channels as well as notified to customers. Use 
of any other phone/mobile numbers/e-mail 
should be prohibited. 
(e) Conduct of regular customer awareness 
campaigns
Financial sector regulators may prescribe 
conduct of regular awareness campaigns for 
customers on suitable themes by financial 
services providers.
The recommendations and action points 
for addressing various impediments 
and challenges and achieving strategic 
objectives under Panch Jyoti offer a holistic 
and synergistic approach towards financial 
inclusion. Table IV.1 provides a snapshot of 
challenges/ impediments, recommendations/ 
action points aimed at addressing them and 
also identifies the stakeholders responsible 
for implementation.


--- PAGE 48 ---
48
National Strategy for Financial Inclusion 2025-30
Table IV.1: Challenges/ Impediments to FI, Strategic Objectives/ Action Points, and Implementing Stakeholders
Identified Challenges/
Impediments to Financial 
Inclusion
(Ref: Chapter-II)
Addressing Challenges/Impediments Through 
Strategic Objectives 
(Panch Jyoti)
(Ref: Chapter- IV)
Dimensions of FI
Implementing Stakeholders
(*Including FSPs under their 
respective jurisdictions)
Strategic 
Objectives 
(Panch Jyoti)
Action Points
*RBI
*IRDAI
*PFRDA
*SEBI
NABARD
NSDC
NCFE
Deficiencies in quality and 
consistency of the access to 
financial services and need for 
availability of full range of basic 
financial services.
Improving the availability and use of Equitable, Responsible, Suitable, and Affordable Bouquet of Financial Services to achieve Financial Safety and 
Financial Security for households and micro enterprises. (13 Action Points)
Improving equity, reach, 
consistency, and quality of last 
mile access.
Access

Incentive mechanism for BC 
agents from hilly and rural areas.
Access
 
Lack of timely and commensurate 
remuneration to BC agents.
Strengthening the Remuneration 
Structure of BCs.
Access

Difficulties in commercial viability 
of BC outlets due to low transaction 
volume in certain pockets.
Expanding the scope of services 
and improve the sustenance of 
BC operations.
Access
   
Gaps in operations of BC agents 
and inadequate monitoring.
Strengthening of BC Registry.
Access

Need for further expansion and 
deepening of digital financial 
services.
Reaching one billion users in 
digital payments.
Usage

Expanding and Deepening Digital 
Payment Ecosystem (EDDPE). 
 
  Usage

Need for targeted credit flow by 
leveraging digital channels.
Programmable CBDC to Facilitate 
Targeted Credit Flow and Expand 
Access.
  Usage

Unified Lending Interface (ULI) as 
a DPI.
Usage

Need for improving financial 
resilience at household level.
Onboarding of all banks 
and insurance companies 
to Jansuraksha Portal and 
increasing coverage of APY.
Usage
   
Low usage of financial services 
due to complex interfaces and 
language barriers.
Simpler Digital Interfaces.
Usage
   
Credit gaps for micro enterprises. Micro Enterprises to receive 
focussed attention.
Usage

Encouraging adoption of code of 
conduct and best practices.
Promoting Responsible 
Innovation through Self- 
Regulatory Organisations.
Quality
   


--- PAGE 49 ---
49
Insufficient representation of 
women as BC agents.
Adopting Gender-Sensitive Approach for Women-led Financial 
Inclusion and Differentiated Strategies for Improving Financial 
Resilience of Households, especially for the Underserved and 
Vulnerable segments. (6 Action Points)
Increasing the share of women 
business correspondents.
Access

Lack of focused and suitable 
services to vulnerable/ 
underserved segments.
Identification of vulnerable and 
underserved Segments for 
focused services.
Usage
   
Differentiated suitable products 
and delivery channel for 
underserved and vulnerable 
segments.
Usage
   
Ineffective financial resilience at 
the household level.
Development of suitable bundled 
products in investment, pension, 
and insurance domain.
Usage
  
Suitable and fair credit products 
with easier documentation 
process and quick disbursals.
Usage

Emergency Credit - Overdraft in 
BSBDAs.
Usage

Lack of regular and sustained 
income/ livelihood and inefficient 
linkages in the financial inclusion 
ecosystem, besides information 
asymmetry.
Synergizing Livelihood, Skill Development and Support 
Ecosystem and its linkages with Financial Inclusion. 
(7 Action Points)
Content Development and 
Delivery for Skill Training.
Usage
 
Adoption of NSQF by all skilling 
institutions and availability of 
course content in all languages.
Usage

Synergize resources of all the 
skilling institutions with focus on 
gender sensitive approach.
Usage

Data Sharing and Reporting on 
number and types of skill training 
conducted.
Usage

Dissemination of Information on 
Skill Loan schemes of NSDC, 
GOI, and State Govt.
Usage
 
Lack of sufficient credit linkage of 
skill trained individuals.
Funding and Financial Support to 
Skill Trained Individuals through 
Potential Linked Plan of each 
district.
Usage
 
Lack of sufficient community 
participation to aid the institutional 
efforts in FI.
Leveraging Local Community 
Organizations.
Usage
 
Information asymmetry, Linguistic 
and/or literacy barriers, and 
low level of financial and digital 
awareness.
Leveraging Financial 
Education as a tool for 
Promoting Financial 
Discipline.
(10 Action Points)
Sustaining and deepening 
financial literacy initiatives.
Quality
     
Differentiated contents and 
focussed delivery channels.
Quality

Setting up of Targeted Financial 
Literacy Units.
Quality
 
CHAPTER - IV


--- PAGE 50 ---
50
National Strategy for Financial Inclusion 2025-30
Information asymmetry, Linguistic 
and/or literacy barriers, and 
low level of financial and digital 
awareness.
Leveraging Financial Education as a tool for Promoting Financial 
Discipline.
(10 Action Points)
Improving Digital Literacy.
Quality

Development and dissemination 
of contents – Sustainable 
Indebtedness.
Quality

Need for focus on emerging risks 
to financial resilience.
Development and dissemination 
of contents – Realistic goal 
setting, financial planning, etc.
Quality

Need for assessment and focused 
financial literacy campaigns.
Periodic Assessment of the state 
of financial literacy.
Quality

Focused awareness initiatives for 
specific regions/ groups.
Quality

Need for easy availability of 
authentic information and 
awareness campaigns for 
customer protection and grievance 
redressal measures.
Developing AI & ML-based public 
query systems on common 
banking and finance-related 
aspects.
Quality
   
Conduct of suitably positioned 
social media campaigns on 
consumer protection and 
grievance redressal measures.
Quality
   
Need for simple and efficient 
grievance redress mechanism.
         Strengthening the Quality and Reliability of Customer Protection and Grievance 
Redressal Measures. 
(8 Action Points)
Simpler and Less Burdensome 
Solutions. 
Quality
   
Use of pre-intimated official phone 
numbers by banks. 
Quality
   
Need for effective measures for 
mitigation and protection form 
cyber/ payment fraud.
Streamlining and Onboarding 
of banks on Citizen Financial 
Cyber Frauds Reporting and 
Management System.
Quality

Board approved Customer 
Grievance Redress Policy.
Quality
   
Digital Payments Intelligence 
Platform.
Quality

Need for responsible behaviour by 
financial service providers.
Protection against dark patterns.
Quality
   
Need for focused attention 
to customer protection while 
promoting tech innovations.
Guardrails against Tech 
Innovations.
Quality
   
Need for creation of customer 
awareness
Conduct of regular customer 
awareness campaigns.
Quality
   


--- PAGE 51 ---
51
Improving effectiveness of 
measurement and monitoring 
mechanism.
Monitoring and measurement 
mechanism for assessing progress 
in FI space. (3 Action Points)
Data collection and dissemination 
by financial sector regulators.
   
Development of broader and 
disaggregated FI-Index.
   
Conduct of studies/surveys.    
Table IV.2 Stakeholder-Wise Distribution Matrix of the Action Points
Sr Chap-
ters /
Strategic 
Objec-
tives
Number 
of action 
points
Number of action points for each stakeholder
RBI
IRDAI
PFRDA
SEBI
NABARD
NSDC
NCFE
1 IV.1 13 13 4 4 3 2 - -
2 IV.2 6 5 3 3 3 - - -
3 IV.3 7 3 - - - 2 5 1
4 IV.4 10 4 3 3 3 2 - 7
5 IV.5 8 8 6 6 6 - - -
6 V 3 3 3 3 3 - - -
Total 47 36 (77%) 19 (40%) 19 (40%) 18 (38%) 6 (13%) 5 (11%) 8 (17%)
Table IV.3 - FI-Dimensions Wise Distribution Matrix of the Action Points
FI - Dimensions Number of action points
Access 6 (13%)
Usage 19 (40%)
Quality 19 (40%) 
Monitoring & Measurement 3 (7%)
Total 47 (100%)
CHAPTER - IV


--- PAGE 52 ---
52
National Strategy for Financial Inclusion 2025-30
CHAPTER-V 
Monitoring and Measurement Mechanism
The NSFI envisions an ecosystem approach 
towards achieving universal financial inclusion. 
A set of milestones encompassing various 
areas where specific actions are required on 
the part of stakeholders are also laid down. 
Periodic evaluation and measurement are 
integral to the strategy as they provide the 
evidence needed to gauge the impact of the 
measures taken under its ambit. For this, it is 
necessary to identify suitable indicators so that 
the progress in the intended direction can be 
assessed, and impact of policy formulations 
and focus areas can be identified, as the 
adage goes - ‘If you can measure it, you can 
improve it.’
2. Indicators related to financial inclusion are 
typically classified under ‘Access’, ‘Usage’ 
and ‘Quality’ with associated disaggregation 
to allow for detailed evaluation based on 
geography and demography (gender, age, 
income, etc.). While supply side assessment 
can be facilitated trough regulatory returns 
and other such readily available data points, 
the demand side assessment necessitates 
conduct of studies/surveys to gain insights into 
the quality of financial inclusion at the ground 
level and identify enablers for advancing 
financial inclusion. 
3. As such, it is recommended that the state 
of financial inclusion be measured and 
monitored to cover both the supply side of 
financial inclusion (type of financial products 
and services, and delivery channels) and the 
demand side of financial inclusion (factors that 
affect the usage of financial services).
Supply Side Measurement: 
4. While there would always be a need for the 
traditional data sets related to banking outlets, 
ATMs, basic savings bank deposit accounts, 
credit, digital payments, investments in 
mutual funds, insurance, and pension 
products, awareness initiatives, etc., to have 
more detailed and granular assessment, the 
disaggregated data based on geography, 
gender, age, etc. are also vital. In addition, to 
evaluate the quality of inclusion and understand 
the barriers to financial access, data on new-
to-credit entrants, cost of accessing financial 
services at the last mile, inoperative accounts, 
inactive business correspondents, etc., 
assume significance. 
5. Based on the above, the following approach 
may be adopted towards data collection and 
dissemination by all financial sector regulators, 
going forward. 
a) Data collection efforts may ensure coverage 
of formal financial institutions in the financial 
inclusion ecosystem, in totality.
b) Data should be captured at the district level 
with gender and age disaggregation so as to 
facilitate assessment of geographical, gender, 
and age-related dimensions in access and 
usage of financial products and services and 
gain cross-sectional insights. An indicative list 
of datapoints pertaining to the banking sector 
is placed in the appendix to this chapter. The 


--- PAGE 53 ---
53
same may be made available in public domain.
c) Customer data captured by financial 
services providers should include broad 
categories such as income level, education, 
occupation, purpose, etc. to enable analysis 
and better positioning of policy measures.
d) Widely acceptable and harmonized data 
definition should be developed for select 
terminologies, namely, Vulnerable Consumers, 
Migrants, etc., which can be used across the 
financial sector for suitable interventions.
e) The current FI-Index reflects the advances 
made in the financial inclusion space at the 
country level. With a view to assessing the 
extent of financial inclusion at the regional level, 
there is a need for developing disaggregated 
FI Index, preferably at State/UT level. To begin 
with, during the period of NSFI:2025-30, a 
new series of FI-Index with broader coverage 
and State/UT level disaggregation may be 
constructed and published.
Demand Side Measurement - Conduct of 
Studies/Surveys
6. In conjunction with supply side data 
collection, to gather details about the barriers 
to access and usage of financial services, 
and quality of inclusion, especially at the 
last mile, demand side measurement is 
necessary. This can be done through demand 
side surveys/ focus group studies, which can 
reveal the drivers of financial inclusion and 
help identifying impeders in the form of socio-
economic factors, suitability of products and 
services, debt vulnerabilities at household 
level, level of financial literacy and capability, 
state of grievance redress, etc.
7. Arguably, focusing on the end user’s 
perspective, the demand side measurement 
has the potential to throw light on aspects 
such as alignment of need and demand, 
bottlenecks in delivery of financial services at 
the last mile, regional inadequacies, evolving 
preferences, etc. 
8. It is recommended that a mechanism of 
conducting regular studies/ surveys to assess 
the state of financial inclusion to be put in 
place by financial sector regulators. 
Way Forward 
9. Financial inclusion policies duly integrated 
with financial education, customer protection, 
skill development, livelihood support, 
entrepreneurship, and market linkages, with a 
multi-stakeholder approach, can be enablers 
of desired outcomes reflected in an improved 
state of financial safety, financial security, 
financial resilience, and financial discipline, in 
turn contributing towards wellbeing of people. 
Hence, adoption of a holistic and synergistic 
approach to financial inclusion is the way 
forward.


--- PAGE 54 ---
54
National Strategy for Financial Inclusion 2025-30
Appendix: District wise data points pertaining to the banking sector:
Sr No Indicators/Data Points Disaggregation
Access  
1 Number of Banking Outlets manned by bank’s own staff Population Group Wise
2 Number of Banking outlets manned by BC [Fixed Point BC 
Outlet [FBC]] Population Group Wise
3 Number of Digital Banking Units (DBUs) Population Group Wise
4 Number of BC Outlets other than FBCs Population Group Wise
5 Number of ATMs Population Group Wise
6 Number of Inactive FBC Population Group Wise
7 Number of Inactive BC Outlets other than FBC Population Group Wise
Usage – Savings
8 Number of Savings Accounts Gender, Age and Population Group 
Wise
9 Balance Outstanding in Savings Accounts Gender, Age and Population Group 
Wise
10 Number of BSBD Accounts Gender, Age and Population Group 
Wise
11 Balance Outstanding in BSBD Accounts Gender, Age and Population Group 
Wise
12 Out of BSBD Accounts, Number of PMJDY accounts Gender, Age and Population Group 
Wise
13 Out of BSBD Accounts, balance outstanding in PMJDY ac-
counts
Gender, Age and Population Group 
Wise
14 Out of BSBD Accounts, Number of BSBD Small Accounts Gender, Age and Population Group 
Wise
15 Out of BSBD Accounts, balance outstanding in BSBD- Small 
Accounts
Gender, Age and Population Group 
Wise
16 Number of dormant/ inoperative BSBD accounts Gender, Age and Population Group 
Wise
17 Balance outstanding in dormant/ inoperative BSBD accounts Gender, Age and Population Group 
Wise
18 Number of dormant/ inoperative PMJDY accounts Gender, Age and Population Group 
Wise
19 Balance outstanding in dormant/ inoperative PMJDY accounts Gender, Age and Population Group 
Wise
20 Number of BSBD Accounts availing Overdraft (OD) Facility Gender, Age and Population Group 
Wise
21 Balance outstanding in BSBD Accounts availing OD Facility Gender, Age and Population Group 
Wise
22 Number of PMJDY Accounts availing Overdraft (OD) Facility Gender, Age and Population Group 
Wise


--- PAGE 55 ---
55
APPENDIX
Appendix: District wise data points pertaining to the banking sector:
Sr No Indicators/Data Points Disaggregation
23 Balance outstanding in PMJDY Accounts availing OD Facility Gender, Age and Population Group 
Wise
24
Number of BSBD Accounts in which Value-Added Services 
(Cheque Book, Mobile Banking, SMS, Internet Banking etc.) 
are provided
Gender, Age and Population Group 
Wise
Usage - Entrepreneurial Credit
25 Number of loan accounts to Micro Enterprises Gender and Population Group Wise
26 Amount outstanding in the loan to Micro Enterprises Gender and Population Group Wise
27 Loans to Micro Enterprises - Disbursement during the Quarter Gender and Population Group Wise
28 Number of loan accounts to Individual [Entrepreneurs not 
classified as MSME] Gender and Population Group Wise
29 Amount outstanding in the loan accounts to Individual [Entre-
preneurs not classified as MSME] Gender and Population Group Wise
30 Loans to Individual [Entrepreneurs not classified as MSME] - 
Disbursement during the Quarter Gender and Population Group Wise
Usage - Farm Credit  
31 Number of loans accounts to SF/MF Gender, Age and Population Group 
Wise
32 Amount outstanding in loan to SF/MF Gender, Age and Population Group 
Wise
33 Loans to SF/MF - Disbursement during the Quarter Gender, Age and Population Group 
Wise
34 Number of KCC accounts Gender, Age and Population Group 
Wise
35 Amount outstanding in KCC accounts Gender, Age and Population Group 
Wise
36 KCC Loans - Disbursement during the Quarter Gender, Age and Population Group 
Wise
Usage - New to Credit 
37 Number of New to Credit Accounts [Individual] Gender, Age and Population Group 
Wise
38 Sanctioned amount of loan to New to Credit Accounts [individ-
ual]
Gender, Age and Population Group 
Wise
39 Number of New to Credit Accounts-Micro Enterprises [MSME] Gender, and Population Group Wise
40 Sanctioned amount of loan to New to Credit Accounts - Micro 
Enterprises [MSME] Gender, and Population Group Wise
41 Number of New to Credit Accounts-Small Enterprises [MSME] Gender, and Population Group Wise
42 Sanctioned amount of loan to New to Credit Accounts - Small 
Enterprises [MSME] Gender, and Population Group Wise
43 Number of New to Credit Accounts- [MSME] Gender, and Population Group Wise


--- PAGE 56 ---
56
National Strategy for Financial Inclusion 2025-30
Appendix: District wise data points pertaining to the banking sector:
Sr No Indicators/Data Points Disaggregation
44 Sanctioned amount of loan to New to Credit Accounts - 
[MSME] Gender, and Population Group Wise
Usage - Micro Credit 
45 Number of Savings Bank Account of SHGs Population Group Wise
46 Amount outstanding in Savings Bank Account of SHGs Population Group Wise
47 Number of credit-linked SHGs with outstanding credit Population Group Wise
48 Amount outstanding in credit linked SHG accounts Population Group Wise
49 Loans to SHGs - Disbursement during the Quarter Population Group Wise
50 Number of loan accounts to JLG Population Group Wise
51 Amount outstanding to JLG Population Group Wise
52 Loans to JLGs - Disbursement during the Quarter Population Group Wise
Indicators on Business Correspondents/ Last mile delivery 
53 Number of BC Agents Gender and Population Group Wise
54
Out of total Number of BCs, BCs providing at least cash in, 
cash out, remittance and opening of savings account facilities 
(population group wise)
Gender and Population Group Wise
55 Commission Paid to BC Agents
Amount [ Nil, Less than 10K; 10k to 
20k and 20K & Above], Gender and 
Population Group Wise
Indicators on Doorstep Banking Services 
56 Number of Senior Citizen A/C holders Gender, Age and Population Group 
Wise
57 Number of Senior Citizen A/C holders provided Doorstep 
Banking Services
Gender, Age and Population Group 
Wise
58 Number of Differently abled A/C holders Gender, Age and Population Group 
Wise
59 Number of Differently abled A/C holders provided Doorstep 
Banking Services
Gender, Age and Population Group 
Wise
Indicators on transactions through Business Correspondent/ Last mile delivery 
60 Remittances through ICT-BC transactions (Number) Gender and Population Group Wise
61 Remittances through ICT-BC transactions (Amt.) Gender and Population Group Wise
62 Deposits through ICT-BC transactions (Number) Gender and Population Group Wise
63 Deposits through ICT-BC transactions (Amt.) Gender and Population Group Wise
64 Withdrawals through ICT-BC transactions (Number) Gender and Population Group Wise
65 Withdrawals through ICT-BC transactions (Amt.) Gender and Population Group Wise
66 Non-Financial Transactions (Number) Gender and Population Group Wise


--- PAGE 57 ---
57
APPENDIX
Appendix: District wise data points pertaining to the banking sector:
Sr No Indicators/Data Points Disaggregation
67 Other FI products - Micro-Insurance, Pension, etc. through 
BCs (Number) Gender and Population Group Wise
68 Charges recovered from customers for transactions undertak-
en through BC Gender and Population Group Wise
Usage of Digital Access Methods  
69 Number of accounts that used RTGS/NEFT/IMPS/UPI/Other 
Digital methods during the reporting quarter
Gender, Age and Population Group 
Wise


--- PAGE 58 ---
58
National Strategy for Financial Inclusion 2025-30
NSFI (2019-24) - STRATEGIC PILLARS, 
MILESTONES AND ACHIEVEMENTS
Strategic Pillar – I: Universal Access to 
Financial Services
Every village to have access to a formal financial 
service provider within a reasonable distance of 
5 KM radius. The customers may be onboarded 
through an easy and hassle-free digital process 
and processes should be geared towards a less-
paper ecosystem.
Milestones –
● Increasing outreach of banking outlets of 
Scheduled Commercial Banks /Payments Banks/ 
Small Finance Banks, to provide banking access 
to every village within a 5 KM radius/ hamlet of 
500 households in hilly areas by March 2020.
● Strengthen eco-system for various modes of 
digital financial services in all the Tier-II to Tier 
VI centres to create the necessary infrastructure 
to move towards a less cash society by March 
2022.
● Leverage on the developments in fin-tech 
space to encourage financial service providers 
to adopt innovative approaches for strengthening 
outreach through virtual modes including mobile 
apps so that every adult has access to a financial 
service provider through a mobile device by 
March 2024.
● Move towards an increasingly digital and 
consent-based architecture for customer 
onboarding by March 2024.
Achievements – 
1. As per the milestone,1.21 lakh villages were 
identified for providing banking access within a 
radius of 5 Kms/hamlet of 500 households. In 
this regard, more than 99.9 percent villages have 
been provided with some form of banking access.
2. In order to facilitate digital on-boarding of 
customers by leveraging the latest technology, 
RBI amended the Master Direction on KYC 
dated February 25, 2016 on January 9, 2020 to 
introduce Video based Customer Identification 
Process (V-CIP) for customer on-boarding. This 
is an alternative, consent-based customer on-
boarding process with certain risk-mitigants and 
can be implemented using digital devices such 
as mobile phones etc. In addition, ‘Digital KYC’ 
and ‘Equivalent e-Documents’, as provided in the 
amendment dated August 19, 2020 to the PML 
Rules, have also been introduced in the Master 
Direction on KYC for digital on-boarding of the 
customers.
3. To further leverage V-CIP for customer due 
diligence (CDD), RBI vide changes in the MD 
on KYC dated May 10, 2021, has expanded the 
scope of Video based Customer Identification 
Procedure (V-CIP) to include all categories of 
customers including Authorised Signatories 
and Beneficial Owners of Legal Entities by 
leveraging Aadhaar number of the UIDAI and the 
KYC Identifier of the Centralised KYC Registry. 
Besides, periodical up-dation has also been 
enabled using V-CIP.
4. In a bid to provide fillip to innovative solutions 
Regulatory Sandbox mechanism has been 
institutionalised and five cohorts have been hosted 
till now, with availability of On-Tap application 
different products being tested in respective 
areas. Further, to facilitate innovation of financial 
products / service providers whose business 
models / activities / features fall within the remit 
of more than one financial sector regulator, a 
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for Inter-
ANNEX I – NSFI: 2019-24 MILESTONES AND ACHIEVEMENTS


--- PAGE 59 ---
59
operable Regulatory Sandbox (IoRS) has been 
put in place.
5. Unified Payments Interface (UPI): RBI has 
facilitated linking of credit cards with UPI which 
will enable even small merchants with QR codes 
to have a share of spends in credit. UPI Lite an 
on-device wallet put in place offers payment 
facility up to ₹ 1,000 without the requirement of 
UPI PIN, with wallet having a limit of ₹5,000. 
The payments from UPI Lite does not hit the 
issuer bank thus reducing the load on CBS and 
increasing the success rate of the transactions. 
As an extension of UPI Lite, UPI Lite X (offline 
payments) has been launched in September 
2023. UPI payments (P2P and P2M) of up to 
₹500- can be made without the requirement of 
mobile network
6. A framework for Facilitating Small Value Digital 
Payments in Offline Mode was initiated by DPSS, 
RBI in January 2022. 
7. Conversational payments were launched in 
September 2023, enabling users to engage 
in a conversation with an Artificial Intelligence 
(AI) powered system to initiate and complete 
transactions in a safe and secure environment. 
This is expected to create a shift in payments 
and banking from the graphical user interface 
towards conversational user payments navigated 
by voice. Since payments are facilitated in Indian 
regional languages, this will increase payment 
accessibility to the population conversant with 
their mother tongue. This will also help in inclusion 
of senior citizens, divyangjan  and new users to 
digital payments.
8. The Reserve Bank has set up the Reserve Bank 
Innovation Hub (RBIH) to promote innovation 
across the financial sector by leveraging on 
technology and creating an environment which 
would facilitate and foster innovation.
9. With the objective of encouraging fintech 
adoption and innovation, IRDAI has notified 
Regulatory Sandbox under which over 300 
proposals have been examined and appropriate 
approvals given. There were proposals related 
to deployment of fintech in onboarding, policy 
service and claim settlement to customers.
10. IRDAI has instructed all the stakeholders 
on the progressive implementation of digital 
based customer on-boarding, policy servicing 
and policyholder education. Most of the insurers 
have developed different innovative solutions like 
Customer Portals, Mobile Apps, WhatsApp, web-
based tools, etc. to engage with the customers. 
About 60% of the insurers have launched mobile 
apps to provide access to insurance sales as 
well as services. IRDAI is following-up with 
the remaining for the same and are confident 
of reaching out to all adults to provide access 
through mobile device within the timelines.   
11. Insurers have been allowed to design products 
which offer a range of policy terms, subject to a 
minimum policy term of one month, with respect 
to individual pure risk product, group term, group 
credit life and micro insurance products.
12. IRDAI has revised its regulations of rural and 
social sector obligations for insurers.  The revised 
regulations mark a significant change in how 
insurance inclusion is measured. For General 
insurance, the focus has shifted from Gross 
Direct Premium to the number of policies issued 
at Gram Panchayat level, with an emphasis on 
covering motor vehicles, dwellings and shops. 
For Life and Health insurance, the number of 
lives covered under life insurance or health and 


--- PAGE 60 ---
60
National Strategy for Financial Inclusion 2025-30
personal accident insurance in a gram panchayat 
are reckoned instead of number of policies 
issued. 
13. The scope of social sector has been 
enhanced to cover cardholders (like BPL 
Cardholders, E-Shram cardholders, MNREGA 
cardholders, DBT beneficiaries, Jan Dhan 
Account holders etc.) and beneficiaries under 
various insurance scheme. To enable greater 
coverage of lives, the proportion of lives stipulated 
as social sector obligation has been raised from 
0.5-5 per cent to 10 per cent of all lives covered 
for all Life, General and Standalone Health 
insurers. This shift widens the social sector 
insurance net significantly, bringing more lives 
under its protection. 
14. To enable the policyholders/prospects 
to have wider choice and access to insurance 
through various distribution channels and 
facilitate the reach of insurance to the last mile, 
the maximum number of tie ups for Corporate 
Agents (CA) and Insurance Marketing Firms 
(IMF) have been increased. A CA can tie up with 
9 insurers (earlier 3 insurers) and IMF can tie up 
with 6 insurers (earlier 2 insurers) in each line of 
business of life, general and health for distribution 
of their insurance products. The area of operation 
of IMF has also been expanded to cover entire 
state in which they are registered.
15. PFRDA has enabled Points of Presence 
(PoPs) to onboard subscribers under National 
Pension System (NPS) through double factor 
authentication and video KYC. Further, PFRDA 
had made major strides in digital consent-based 
architecture by using offline/online Aadhaar for 
not only onboarding but for servicing and exit.
16. Mobile applications have been developed 
by PFRDA for service related to NPS, NPS-
Lite, Swavalamaban Scheme, and Atal Pension 
Yojana (APY).
17. In order to facilitate universal access 
to financial services and to leverage on the 
developments in fin-tech space, SEBI has taken 
various measures such as:
18. SEBI introduced Straight through 
Processing (STP) for automating the end-
to-end processing of transactions of various 
financial instruments. The market participants 
like stockbrokers, etc. also started introducing 
mobile apps for facilitating trading mechanism for 
investors. 
19. Investors were enabled to open their 
trading and demat accounts and mutual fund 
folios online using e-KYC and can use these 
accounts for trading purposes. Further, SEBI 
has also provided a facility of Basic Services 
Demat Account (BSDA) to retail investors, where 
no/ minimal annual maintenance charges are 
required to be paid by investors having a holding 
value up to ₹ 10 lakh.
20. In order to increase the accessibility of 
mutual funds to a wider population base, the 
minimum amount for investment in a scheme of 
mutual funds has been maintained at Rs.500/-. 
Further, SEBI had also introduced the concept 
of micro-SIP, where an individual can invest in 
mutual funds through SIP mode by making a 
minimal investment of Rs.100/- per month. As on 
March 2024, there were 17.78 crore mutual fund 
folios.
21. To facilitate the accessibility of the 
primary market to investors, the mechanism of 
IPO investing has been digitalised. Investors can 
bid In IPOs using their banking Account through 


--- PAGE 61 ---
61
ANNEX I
ASBA and UPI. Further, the offer documents 
are also made available on online platforms like 
websites of the company launching the IPO, 
stock exchange and SEBI, so that they are easily 
available for the investors’ reference.
22. Online platforms are available in the 
securities markets so as to enable mutual fund 
investors/holders to register their KYC, invest/
redeem units of mutual funds and carry out non-
financial transactions like change in email ID/bank 
account/contact number etc. Further, in order to 
safeguard the interest of unitholders, SEBI has 
introduced Two Factor Authentication (2FA) for 
online transactions for purchase/redemption/
nomination of mutual fund units. 
23. ‘Risk-o-meter’ was introduced in mutual 
fund schemes which enables mutual fund 
unitholders to align risk that a fund carries with 
the risk profile of the investor.
Strategic Pillar – II: Providing Basic Bouquet 
of Financial Services
Every adult who is willing and eligible needs to 
be provided with a basic bouquet of financial 
services that include a Basic Savings Bank 
Deposit Account, credit, a micro life and non-
life insurance product, a pension product, and a 
suitable investment product.
Milestones – 
● Every willing and eligible adult who has been 
enrolled under the PMJDY (including the young 
adults who have recently taken up employment) 
to be enrolled under an insurance scheme 
(PMJJBY, PMSBY, etc.), Pension scheme (NPS, 
APY, etc.) by March 2020.
● Capacity building of all BCs either directly by 
the parent entity or through accredited institutions 
by March 2020.
● Make the Public Credit Registry (PCR) fully 
operational by March 2022 so that authorised 
financial entities can leverage on the same for 
assessing credit proposals from all citizens.
Achievements – 
1. Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana 
[PMJJBY]: As of March 2024, 16 crore 
beneficiaries have been enrolled under PMJJBY.
2. Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana 
[PMSBY]: As of March 2024, 33.78 crore 
beneficiaries have been enrolled under PMSBY.
3. Atal Pension Yojana [APY]: As of March 2024, 
5.55 crore subscribers were enrolled under APY.
4. The Government in its Union Budget 2023-24 
has announced setting up a separate National 
Financial Information Registry (NFIR) to serve 
as the central repository of financial and ancillary 
information. 
5. Train the Trainers Programme aimed at 
sensitising the Business Correspondents 
[BCs] through the rural branch managers was 
instrumental in capacity building of the BC agents. 
More than 51000 bank officials were trained, who 
in turn sensitised more than 27 lakh BCs. The 
programme led to handholding of BC agents by 
banks on a regular basis.
Strategic Pillar – III: Access to Livelihood and 
Skill Development
The new entrant to the financial system, if 
eligible and willing to undergo any livelihood/ 
skill development programme, may be given 
the relevant information about the ongoing 
Government livelihood programmes thus 
helping them to augment their skills and engage 
in meaningful economic activity and improve 


--- PAGE 62 ---
62
National Strategy for Financial Inclusion 2025-30
income generation.
Milestones – 
● All the relevant details pertaining to the 
ongoing skill development and livelihood 
generation programmes through RSETIs, NRLM, 
NULM, PMKVY shall be made available to the 
new entrants at the time of account opening. 
The details of the account holders including 
unemployed youth, and women who are willing 
to undergo skill development and be a part of 
the livelihood programme may be shared to the 
concerned skill development centres/ livelihood 
mission and vice versa by March 2020.
● Keeping in view the importance of handholding 
for the newly financially included SHGs/ Micro 
entrepreneurs, a framework for a focused 
approach ensuring convergence of efforts from 
civil society/ banks/ NGOs to increase their 
awareness on financial literacy, managerial 
skills, credit, and market linkages needs to be 
developed by National Skill Development Mission 
by March 2022.
Achievements – 
1. Sensitisation of beneficiaries under various 
skill development and livelihood generation 
programmes are deliberated at SLBC/UTLBC. 
2. During the FY 2023-24, more than 18.42 
lakh beneficiaries have been sensitised through 
different skill development programmes, with 
approximately 49.02% (9.03 lakh) of the total 
beneficiaries sensitised being bank linked or 
credit linked. Nearly 90% of the total beneficiaries 
were women. 
3. Further, banks were advised to institutionalise 
a mechanism to provide details of relevant skill 
development related information to ‘new to bank’ 
customers by sourcing the relevant information/
details from respective SLBC/UTLBC website. 
Most of the banks have confirmed action taken 
in this regard.
4. NABARD provides grant support for 
promotion, nurturing and credit linkage of SHGs 
with the banks. Further, NABARD is conducting 
livelihood interventions through Micro Enterprise 
Development Programme (MEDP) and Livelihood 
and Enterprise Development Programme (LEDP) 
targeted towards SHGs.
5. In the programmes implemented through 
NRLM, a dedicated field level architecture for 
financial literacy has been created.
6. SIDBI under its mandate, had been actively 
engaged in implementing several schemes 
and programmes directed at promotion and 
development of the MSME sector as a whole.
Strategic Pillar IV: Financial Literacy and 
Education
Easy to understand financial literacy modules 
with specific target audience orientation (e.g.  
children, young adults, women, new workers/ 
entrepreneurs, family person, about to retire, 
retired etc. in the forms of Audio-Video/ booklets 
shall be made available for understanding 
the product and processes involved. It is also 
expected that these modules would help the new 
entrants.
Milestones –
● Develop financial literacy modules through 
National Centre for Financial Education (NCFE) 
that cover financial services in the form of 
Audio-Video content/ booklets etc. These 
modules should be with specific target audience 
orientation (e.g. children, young adults, women, 


--- PAGE 63 ---
63
ANNEX I
new workers/ entrepreneurs, senior citizens etc.) 
by March 2021.
● Focus on process literacy along with concept 
literacy which empowers the customers to 
understand not only what the product is about, 
but also helps them how to use the product by 
using technology led Digital Kiosks, Mobile apps 
etc. through the strategy period (2019-2024).
● Expand the reach of Centres for Financial 
Literacy (CFL) at every block in the country by 
March 2024.
Achievements – 
1. National Centre for Financial Education 
(NCFE) has developed a comprehensive course 
content covering all the four sector regulators in 
the Audio-Video format hosted on NCFE website 
and is Shareable Content Object Reference 
Model [SCORM] compliant. The content has 
four sections (Banking, Securities Markets, 
Insurance and Pension products), further sub-
divided into 20 modules (Money & Transactions, 
Financial Records and Contracts, Managing 
Income & Expenditure, Long Term Planning, 
Financial Safety Nets & Insurance, Scams & 
Frauds etc) of 15 - 20 minutes each as per the 
overall architecture of the OECD/INFE Core 
Competencies Framework on Financial Literacy. 
Different modules cater to different target groups 
viz. Entrepreneurs/MSMEs, Senior Citizens, 
Women, Young Adults, Children, etc.
2. The revised National Strategy for Financial 
Education (2020-2025) came up with a 
comprehensive five-year action plan which inter 
alia, also covers process literacy and digital 
literacy.
3. RBI in its endeavour to disseminate financial 
literacy has updated financial literacy content 
in various languages on its website including 
financial education webpage, namely, “RBI Kehta 
Hai” and social media channels. Further, the 
FAME (Financial Awareness Messages) booklet 
containing twenty institution/product neutral 
financial awareness messages, propagating 
relevant messages across the four themes of 
Financial Competencies, Basic Banking, Digital 
Financial Literacy and Consumer Protection has 
been placed on Bank’ website.
4. NCFE has been conducting its Financial 
Education programmes, namely Financial 
Education Training Programme (FETP), Financial 
Awareness and Consumer Training (FACT) 
and Financial Education Programme for Adults 
(FEPA) both in online and offline mode. Further, 
NCFE’s Money Smart School Programme 
(MSSP) encourages school students from Class 
VI - X to enhance their financial knowledge. In line 
with OECD recommendation, National Financial 
Literacy Assessment Test (NFLAT) conducted 
by the NCFE, encourages school students of 
Class VI to XII, to acquire basic financial skills 
necessary to make informed and effective 
financial decisions throughout each stage of their 
lives. 
5. NCFE has developed an E-Learning platform 
(E-LMS), wherein interactive audio-visual modules 
are available on financial literacy. NCFE has also 
installed an Artificial Intelligence based chatbot 
on its official website to answer consumer queries 
on financial education. Apart from these, NCFE 
has developed Financial Education Handbook for 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) 
as well as 15 graphic novels/comic books on 
Financial Education topics.


--- PAGE 64 ---
64
National Strategy for Financial Inclusion 2025-30
6. NCFE also promotes its financial education 
activities on various social media and has a 
cumulative reach of 21 Million+ since inception. 
NCFE has installed a network of 71 large format 
Digital Signage Systems (DSS) and 31 interactive 
touch screen kiosks at 102 different locations in 
5 states of India, to disseminate messages on 
financial awareness.
7. Council for the Indian School Certificate 
Examination (CISCE) Board has integrated 
financial education in their school curriculum for 
standard VI-X.
8. A common financial education booklet for 
different target groups has been developed 
by SEBI in English, Hindi, and other regional 
languages. This booklet covers various basic 
concepts related to securities market, banking, 
insurance and pension sector, government 
schemes, do’s and don’ts of investing, etc. It is 
available in digital format on the SEBI investor 
website. A securities market booklet has also 
been developed by SEBI in English, Hindi and 
other 11 regional languages. This booklet covers 
basic concepts related to basics of investing, 
account opening process, process of investing 
in the markets, Mutual Funds and ETFs and 
grievance redressal in Securities Markets, thus 
focusing on process literacy. It is available in 
digital format on the SEBI investor website.
9. SEBI has put in place a network of Securities 
Market Trainers (SMARTs) to enhance investor 
education activities and generate awareness 
regarding securities market by engaging trainers 
from various fields. SMARTs are expected to 
conduct investor awareness programmes for 
existing and prospective investors in securities 
market, the topics covering different aspects of 
the securities market viz, introduction to securities 
markets, KYC, IPO, mutual funds, grievance 
redressal mechanism, etc. 
10. A dedicated SEBI investor website – www.
sebi.investor.gov.in hosts a repository of digital 
content in the format of videos created by Stock 
Exchanges, Depositories and Association of 
Mutual Funds of India on investor education and 
awareness. Similarly, investor education learning 
modules have been curated and hosted on SEBI 
Investor Website.
11. The SEBI Investor website also hosts tools 
like financial calculators, and financial health 
check. Spot a scam has also been developed to 
assist investors in their wellbeing and in avoiding 
potential investment scams.
12. A Mobile App (Saa₹thi) on investor awareness 
developed by SEBI has been made available in 
Hindi and English and on both iOS & Android 
platforms, covering basic aspects of securities 
market, KYC, investor grievance redressal 
mechanism, etc. The app also features a range 
of videos designed to assist investors in their 
personal finance planning.
13. SEBI has issued investor charter to promote 
transparency and create awareness among the 
investors. It covers different services provided to 
them, timelines related to various services like 
investor grievance redressal mechanism, their 
rights and responsibilities and do’s and don’ts of 
investing in securities market.
14. As part of a digital strategy for investor 
awareness and education, SEBI, in collaboration 
with the stakeholders of securities market 
ecosystem like Exchanges, Depositories and 
AMFI has created and disseminated digital 
content through social media. The content is in 


--- PAGE 65 ---
65
ANNEX I
the form of videos, shorts, reels, infographics, 
quizzes, podcasts, crosswords, newsletters, 
etc. on important investor friendly initiatives of 
SEBI, do’s and don’ts of investing and general 
awareness about securities market. WhatsApp is 
also used by the market infrastructure institutions 
(MIIs) to circulate messages on investor 
awareness and education.
15. SEBI in collaboration with National Institute 
of Securities Markets (NISM) has launched a 
free, voluntary online SEBI-Investor Certification 
Examination to help investors in their journey 
towards gaining comprehensive knowledge 
about investing in the Indian securities markets.
16. Pension Sanchay has been launched on 
the website of PFRDA as an initiative to create 
awareness about pension and other concepts 
related to savings and investments. Media 
campaigns and print advertisements have also 
been rolled out by PFRDA to create awareness 
among public at large.
17. IRDAI maintains the consumer education 
website www.policyholder.gov.in which provides 
easily understandable information about 
insurance to the public.
18. To promote financial inclusion through 
insurance, IRDAI has encouraged insurance 
companies to adopt districts for spreading 
insurance literacy and coverage. The campaigns 
target aspirational districts identified by NITI Aayog.
19. IRDAI also conducts various insurance 
awareness campaigns through a multi-pronged 
approach using electronic, print, digital and social 
media platforms.
20. The consumer web site (IRDAI) has 
information on life, general and health insurance 
dealing with the following questions on how 
to use the product a) You and your insurance 
policy b) Do’s and Don’ts, and c) General Advice. 
Further the sales literatures of the products by 
all insurers invariably describe how the product 
works.
21. As on March 31, 2024, a total of 2414 Centres 
for Financial Literacy (CFLs) have been set up 
covering 7225 blocks.
Strategic Pillar – V: Redressal of Grievance 
and Customer Protection
Customers shall be made aware of the recourses 
available for resolution of their grievances. About 
storing and sharing of customer’s biometric and 
demographic data, adequate safeguards need 
to be ensured to protect the customer’s Right to 
Privacy.
Milestones –
● Strengthening the Internal Grievances 
Redressal Mechanism of financial service 
providers for effectiveness and timely response 
by March 2020.
● Develop a robust customer grievance portal/ 
mobile app which acts as a common interface 
for lodging, tracking and redressal status of the 
grievances pertaining to financial sector collectively 
by all the stakeholders by March 2021.
● Operationalize a Common Toll-Free Helpline 
which offers response to the queries pertaining to 
customer grievances across banking, securities, 
insurance, and pension sectors by March 2022.
● Develop a portal to facilitate inter-regulatory co-
ordination for redressal of customer grievance by 
March 2022.


--- PAGE 66 ---
66
National Strategy for Financial Inclusion 2025-30
Achievements – 
1. Internal Ombudsman (IO) Scheme is in place 
for regulated entities of RBI viz. banks, NBFCs, 
Payment System Operators (PSOs) and Credit 
Information Companies (CICs), as specified in 
Master Direction - Reserve Bank of India (Internal 
Ombudsman for Regulated Entities) Directions, 
2023, dated December 29, 2023. 
2. Integrated Ombudsman Scheme was launched 
by RBI in November 2021, which integrates the 
existing three Ombudsman schemes of RBI 
namely, (i) the Banking Ombudsman Scheme, 
2006; (ii) the Ombudsman Scheme for Non-
Banking Financial Companies, 2018; and (iii) the 
Ombudsman Scheme for Digital Transactions, 
2019. 
1. Central Grievance Management System 
(CGMS) of PFRDA is in place with provision of 
escalation matrix if the grievance is not resolved 
within the timelines.
2. SEBI Complaint Redress System (SCORES - 
www.scores.sebi.gov.in), a web and mobile based 
portal/app is available for lodging complaints.
3. For resolving disputes with market participants 
in the Indian securities market, a common 
Securities Market Online Dispute Resolution 
Portal has been launched which harnesses online 
conciliation and online arbitration for resolution of 
disputes arising in the Indian Securities Market.
4. Integrated Grievance management System 
(IGMS) was launched by IRDAI in the year 2010 
to facilitate registration of complaints by policy 
holders against Insurance Companies.
5. All the sectoral regulators viz. RBI (14448), SEBI 
(1800-266-7575/1800-22-7575), IRDAI (155255) 
and PFRDA (1800-110-708/069), have put in 
place separate toll-free numbers for addressing 
queries and grievances. The details of the same 
are published on the website of NCFE and are 
also available in the chatbot facility to respond to 
consumer queries.
6. Sachet portal has links to grievance portals 
of all the sectoral regulators and the same is 
prominently displayed in the portal. Further, 
Sachet Portal is available in 13 different 
languages and has a mechanism for inter 
regulatory coordination. The details are also 
hosted on NCFE website.
Strategic Pillar – VI: Effective Co-ordination
There needs to be a focused and continuous 
coordination between the key stakeholders 
viz. Government, the Regulators, financial 
service providers, Telecom Service Regulators, 
Skills Training institutes etc. to make sure that 
the customers are able to use the services 
in a sustained manner. The focus shall be to 
consolidate gains from previous efforts through 
focus on improvement of quality of service of last 
mile delivery viz., capacity building of Business 
Correspondents, creating payments system 
ecosystems at village levels to deepen the 
culture of digital finance leading to ease of use 
and delivery.
Milestones – 
● Clearly articulate the responsibilities/ 
expectations of each of the stakeholders at the 
grass-root level to ensure convergence of action 
between the Government/ Regulators/ financial 
service providers/ Civil Society etc. With the 
Lead Bank Scheme completing 50 years in 2019, 
SLBCs may review and implement the vision, 
action plans and the milestones to be achieved 
during the NSFI period (2019-24).


--- PAGE 67 ---
67
ANNEX I
● With advancements in Geo-Spatial Information 
Technology, a robust monitoring framework 
leveraging on the said technology can be 
developed for monitoring progress under 
financial inclusion with special emphasis given 
to Aspirational Districts, North Eastern Region 
and Left-Wing Extremist affected Districts. A 
monitoring framework and a GIS dashboard to 
be developed by March 2022.
Achievements – 
1. SLBC/UTLBCs in co-ordination with RBI ROs 
monitor and review the progress made under 
access to livelihood and skill development and 
social security scheme (PMJJBY, PMSBY, APY).
2. The Government of India has launched a 
Geographic Information System (GIS) based 
app, namely Jan-Dhan Darshak (JDD) App 
developed by National Informatics Centre (NIC). 
The App displays availability of banking outlets 
within 5 km of all inhabited villages. Coverage of 
unbanked villages is regularly monitored based 
on the information updated by banks on the JDD 
App, with SLBCs playing a constructive role in 
identifying unbanked locations and ensuring 
banking presence in all such locations.
3. Further, with regard to monitoring the progress 
under financial inclusion, RBI has constructed a 
composite Financial Inclusion (FI) Index, which 
holistically measures the extent of financial 
inclusion in the country. The FI Index is a 
comprehensive index having sub-indices for the 
three dimensions of financial inclusion (access, 
usage and quality) comprising parameters from 
all the financial domain viz. banking, insurance, 
pension, investment as well postal.
4. The FI-Index has been published every year 
since 2021, offering insights into the progress 
made and helping to identify gaps in the FI space, 
to be addressed by the concerned stakeholder. 
Review of progress made under the FI-Index is 
also a regular agenda item in the meetings of 
the Technical Group of Financial Inclusion and 
Financial Literacy (TGFIFL) under the Financial 
Stability and Development Council – Sub 
Committee (FSDC-SC).


--- PAGE 68 ---
68
National Strategy for Financial Inclusion 2025-30
Annex II – NSFI 2025-30 – ACTION POINTS, STAKEHOLDERS AND TIMELINE
Sr Ref Action Points Anchor 
Stakeholder*
Timeline
Action Points at Sr No. 1 - 44 are as per Chapter-IV
Strategic Objective I - Improving the availability and use of Equitable, Responsible, and 
Affordable Bouquet of Financial Services to achieve Financial Safety and Financial Security 
for households and micro enterprises [13 Action Points].
1. I.1 Improving equity, reach, consistency, and quality of last 
mile access
SLBCs/UTLBCs Dec 2030
2. I.2 Incentive mechanism for BC agents from hilly and rural 
areas
RBI, NABARD Ongoing
3. I.3 Strengthening the Remuneration Structure of BCs. IBA Dec 2026
4. I.4 Expanding the scope of services and improve the sus-
tenance of BC operations.
FSPs Ongoing
5. I.5 Strengthening of BC Registry. IBA Ongoing
6. I.6(a) Reaching one billion users in digital payments RBI Dec 2029
7. I.6(b) Expanding and Deepening Digital Payment Ecosystem 
(EDDPE)  
SLBCs/UTLBCs Mar 2027
8. I.6(c) Programmable CBDC to Facilitate Targeted Credit 
Flow and Expand Access 
RBI Ongoing
9. I.6(d) Unified Lending Interface (ULI) as a DPI RBI Ongoing
10. I.6(e) Onboarding of all banks and insurance companies to 
Jansuraksha Portal and improving coverage of APY
FSPs, NABARD Ongoing
11. I.6(f) Simpler Digital Interfaces FSPs Ongoing
12. I.7 Micro Enterprises to receive focussed attention. FSPs Ongoing
13. I.8 Promoting Responsible Innovation through Self- Regu-
latory Organisations
SROs Ongoing
Strategic Objective II - Adopting Gender-Sensitive Approach for Women-led Financial Inclusion 
and Differentiated Strategies for Improving Financial Resilience of Households, especially the 
Underserved and Vulnerable Segments [6 Action Points].
14. II.1 Increasing the share of women business correspon -
dents.
SLBCs/UTLBCs Dec 2028
15. II.2 Identification of vulnerable and underserved Segments 
for focused services
Financial Sector 
Regulators
Dec 2026
16. II.3(a) Differentiated suitable products and delivery channel 
for underserved and vulnerable segments
Financial Sector 
Regulators
Ongoing
17. II.3(b) Development of suitable bundled products in invest-
ment, pension, and insurance domain
SEBI, IRDAI, 
PFRDA
Ongoing
18. II.3(c) Suitable and fair credit products with easier documen -
tation process and quick disbursals
FSPs Ongoing
19. II.3(d) Emergency Credit - Overdraft in BSBDAs FSPs Dec 2028


--- PAGE 69 ---
69
Annex II – NSFI 2025-30 – ACTION POINTS, STAKEHOLDERS AND TIMELINE
Strategic Objective III - Synergizing Livelihood, Skill Development and Support Ecosystem and 
its linkages with Financial Inclusion [7 Action Points].
20. III.1(a) Content Development and Delivery for Skill Training NSDC, NCFE Ongoing
21. III.1(b) Adoption of NSQF by all skilling institutions and avail-
ability of course content in all languages.
NSDC Ongoing
22. III.1(c) Synergise resources of all the skilling institutions with 
focus on gender sensitive approach.
NSDC Ongoing
23. III.2 Data Sharing and Reporting on number and types of 
skill training conducted
NSDC Ongoing
24. III.3 (a) Dissemination of Information on Skill Loan schemes of 
NSDC, GOI, and State Govt.
NSDC, FSPs Ongoing
25. III.3 (b) Funding and Financial Support to Skill Trained Individ-
uals through Potential Linked Plan of each district.
SLBCs/ 
UTLBCs, 
NABARD, FSPs
Ongoing
26. III.4 Leveraging Local Community Organizations RBI, NABARD Ongoing
Strategic Objective IV - Leveraging Financial Education as a Tool for Promoting Financial  
Discipline [10 Action Points].
27. IV.1 Sustaining and deepening financial literacy initiatives. NCFE,  
NABARD, FSPs
Ongoing
28. IV.2 (a) Differentiated contents and focussed delivery channels NCFE Ongoing
29. IV.2 (b) Setting up of Targeted Financial Literacy Units. RBI, NABARD Ongoing
30. IV.3 Improving Digital Literacy NCFE Ongoing
31. IV.4 
(a) 
Development and dissemination of contents – Sustain-
able Indebtedness
NCFE Ongoing
32. IV.4 
(b)
Development and dissemination of contents – Realistic 
goal setting, financial planning, etc.
NCFE Ongoing
33. IV.5(a) Periodic Assessment of the state of financial literacy. NCFE Dec 2027
34. IV.5(b) Focused awareness initiatives for specific regions/ 
groups.
NCFE Ongoing
35. IV.6 (a) Developing AI & ML-based public query systems on 
common banking and finance-related aspects.
FSPs Ongoing
36. IV.6 (a) Conduct of suitably positioned social media campaigns 
on consumer protection and grievance redressal mea-
sures.
FSPs Ongoing


--- PAGE 70 ---
70
National Strategy for Financial Inclusion 2025-30
Annex II – NSFI 2025-30 – ACTION POINTS, STAKEHOLDERS AND TIMELINE
Strategic Objective V - Strengthening the Quality and Reliability of Customer Protection and 
Grievance Redressal Measures [8 Action Points].
37. V.1(a) Simpler and Less Burdensome Solutions FSPs Ongoing
38. V.1(b) Streamlining and Onboarding of banks on Citizen Fi-
nancial Cyber Frauds Reporting and Management 
System
FSPs Ongoing
39. V.1(c) Board approved Customer Grievance Redress Policy FSPs Ongoing
40. V.2(a) Digital Payments Intelligence Platform RBI Dec 2026
41. V.2(b) Protection against dark patterns Financial Sector 
Regulators
Ongoing
42. V.2(c) Guardrails against Tech Innovations Financial Sector 
Regulators
Ongoing
43. V.2(d) Use of pre-intimated official phone numbers by banks FSPs Ongoing
44. V.2(e) Conduct of regular customer awareness campaigns Financial Sec-
tor Regulators, 
FSPs
Ongoing
Monitoring and measurement mechanism for assessing progress in FI space  [3 Action Points].
45. Ch-5 Data collection and dissemination by financial sector 
regulators.
Financial Sector 
Regulators
Ongoing
46. Ch-5 Development of broader and disaggregated FI-Index. Financial Sector 
Regulators
June 2026
47. Ch-5 Conduct of studies/surveys Financial Sector 
Regulators
Ongoing
Note –
* Financial Service Providers (FSPs) as anchor stakeholders, shown above, have been mapped to 
their respective regulators as per Table IV.1.


--- PAGE 71 ---
71
References
• www.uidai.gov.in
• www.npci.org.in
• www.sebi.gov.in
• https://investor.sebi.gov.in/. 
• https://jansuraksha.gov.in
• RBI guidelines on ‘Rationalisation of Branch 
Authorisation Policy- Revision of Guidelines’ dated 
May 18, 2017
• RBI guidelines on ‘Financial Inclusion- Access to 
Banking Services – Basic Savings Bank Deposit 
Account (BSBDA)’ dated June 10, 2019
• IRDAI discussion Paper on Tying/Bundling in 
Insurance - https://intranet.irdai.gov.in/web/guest/
document-detail?documentId=369570 
• https: // www. rbi. org. in / Financial Education / 
FLCs_CFLs_Details.aspx 
• https://www.cersai.org.in/
• https://i4c.mha.gov.in/ncrp.aspx
• https://doca.gov.in/DarkPatternsBusterHackathon/
about-us.php
• Master Direction - Know Your Customer (KYC) 
Direction, 2016 
• https://www.rbi.org.in/scripts/FS_PressRelease.
aspx?prid=50901&fn=9
• Report of India’s G20 Task Force on Digital Public 
Infrastructure - https://dea.gov.in/sites/default/files/
Report%20of%20Indias%20G20%20Task%20
Force%20On%20Digital%20Public%20Infrastruc-
ture.pdf 
• https: // www.nabard.org / demo /auth / writere-
addata / File / FARMER %20PRODUCER%20
ORGANISATIONS.pdf
• https://www.rbi.org.in/scripts/BS_PressRelease-
Display.aspx?prid=52068
• https: // www. rbi. org. in / Financial Education / 
FLCs_CFLs_Details.aspx 
• https://www.rbi.org.in/FinancialEducation/con-
tent/I%20Can%20Do_RBI.pdf 
• https://fintech.rbi.org.in/
• https://www.npci.org.in/what-we-do/imps/faqs
• IBA instructions No. IBA/PSBT/L/2024/110 dated 
December 5, 2024
• https://www.iba.org.in/
• RBI guidelines - DOR.SOG (LEG).
REC/64/09.08.024/2023-24 dated January 1, 
2024, on Inoperative Accounts /Unclaimed Depos-
its in Banks- Revised Instructions
• https://www.rbi.org.in/commonman/english/scripts/
FAQs.aspx?Id=2812 
• https://jss.gov.in/
• RBI Master Direction FIDD. MSME & NFS. 12 / 
06.02.31 / 2017-18 dated July 24, 2017 (last updat-
ed on July 23, 2025) on Lending to Micro, Small & 
Medium Enterprises (MSME) Sector
• RBI Master Direction DoR. FIN. REC. 95 / 03.10.038 
/ 2021-22 dated March 14, 2022 (last updated on 
October 10, 2024) on Regulatory Framework for 
Microfinance Loans
• https://www.nabard.org/
• https://ncfe.org.in/ 
• https://cybercrime.gov.in/ 
• https://www.pfrda.org.in/ 
• Gazette Notification dated December 27, 2013 - 
https://egazette.gov.in/ 
• https://www.rbi.org.in/commonman/English/scripts/
FAQs.aspx?Id=274 
• https://www.niesbud.nic.in/ 
• https://npscra.nsdl.co.in/ 
• https://nrlm.gov.in/ 
• https://nsdcindia.org/ 
• https://www.msde.gov.in/ 
• https://www.nabard.org/ 
• https://jansuraksha.in/pmjjbyScheme 
• https://fintech.rbi.org.in/FT_RegSandbox 
• https://nirdpr.org.in/rseti/aboutus.aspx 
• Omnibus Framework for recognising Self-Regula -
tory Organisations (SROs) for Regulated Entities 
(REs) of the Reserve Bank of India – dated March 
21, 2024
• https://www.sidbi.in/ 
• https://www.skillindiadigital.gov.in/ 
• RBI Master Circular on lead Bank Scheme - FIDD.
CO.LBS.BC. No.03/02.01.001/2025-26 dated April 
1, 2025 


--- PAGE 72 ---
72
National Strategy for Financial Inclusion 2025-30
References
• https://www.undp.org/sustainable-develop-
ment-goals 
• RBI Master Direction DoR. FIN. REC. 95 / 
03.10.038 / 2021-22 dated March 14, 2022 (last 
updated on October 10, 2024) on Regulatory 
Framework for Microfinance Loans
• RBI guidelines on Section 23 of the Banking Reg-
ulation Act, 1949 - Master Circular on Branch Au-
thorisation - Census data 2011- DBR.No. BAPD.
BC.12/22.01.001/2016-17 dated September 1, 
2016
• https://udyamassist.gov.in/ 


--- PAGE 73 ---
73


--- PAGE 74 ---
74
National Strategy for Financial Inclusion 2025-30
